SPECIAL ISSUE
Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 152 (Acts No. 31)
REPUBLIC OF KENYA
KENYA GAZETTE SUPPLEMENT
ACTS, 2016
NAIROBI, 7th September, 2016
CONTENT
Act— PAGE
The Access to Information Act, 2016 617
11-ILINCIL FOR LAW REPORTING
EIVED
2 6 SEP 20*
_(JK 10443 - 0010G
KENYA
;27:1 FAX: 2712694
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NAIROBI

-- 1 of 29 --

THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION ACT
No. 31 of 2016
Date of Assent: 31st August, 2016
Date of Commencement: 21st September, 2016
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
PART I—PRELIMINARY
1— Short title.
2—Interpretation.
3—Objects of this Act.
PART II—RIGHT TO INFORMATION
4—Right to information.
5—Disclosure of information by public entities.
6—Limitation of right of access to information.
PART III—ACCESS TO INFORMATION
7—Designation of information access officer.
8—Application for access.
9—Processing of application.
10—Transfer of applications.
11—Providing access to information.
12—Fees.
13—Correction of information.
PART IV—REVIEW OF DECISIONS BY THE
COMMISSION
14—Review of decisions by the Commission.
15—Notice to interested party.
16—Protection of person making disclosure.
17—Management of records.
18—Offences of alteration, defacement, blocking,
erasure, etc.
19—Defamatory matter in information released.

-- 2 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
PART V—CONFERMENT ON THE COMMISSION
OF OVERSIGHT AND ENFORCEMENT
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS
20—Role of the Commission.
21—Functions of the Commission.
22—Inquiry into complaints.
23—Powers of the Commission.
24—Powers relating to investigation.
PART VI—PROVISONS ON DELEGATED POWERS
25— Regulations.
PART VII—MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
26—Annual Reports.
27—Reports by public entities.
28—Offences and penalties.
29—Consequential amendments.
SCHEDULE— CONSEQUENTIAL
AMENDMENTS

-- 3 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION ACT
AN ACT of Parliament to give effect to Article 35 of the
Constitution; to confer on the Commission on
Administrative Justice the oversight and
enforcement functions and powers and for
connected purposes
ENACTED by the Parliament of Kenya, as follows —
PART I—PRELIMINARY
1. This Act may be cited as the Access to Information
Act, 2016.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary for
the time being responsible for matters relating to
information;
"chief executive officer" of a public body or private
body means the Principal Secretary in the case of a
Government Ministry or Department, managing director in
the case of a corporate body, or the person assigned the
principal administrative responsibility in any body by
whatever title; and
"citizen" means any individual who has Kenyan
citizenship, and any private entity that is controlled by one
or more Kenyan citizens.
"Commission" means the Commission on
Administrative Justice established by section 3 of the
Commission on Administrative Justice Act, 2011;
"edited copy" in relation to a document, means a copy
of a document from which exempt information has been
deleted;
"electronic record" means a record generated in digital
form by an information system, which can be transmitted
within an information system or from one information
system to another and stored in an information system or
other medium;
"exempt information" means information that may be
withheld by a public entity or private body in accordance
with section 6;
"information" includes all records held by a public
entity or a private body, regardless of the form in which the
information is stored, its source or the date of production;
No. 31
Short title.
Interpretation.
No. 23 of 2011.

-- 4 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
"information access officer" means any officer of a
public entity or private body designated under section 7 as
such for purposes of this Act;
"interested party" means a person who has an
identifiable stake or legal interest in the proceedings before
the court but is not a party to the proceedings or may not be
directly involved in the litigation;
"national security" has the same meaning assigned to it
by Article 238(1) of the Constitution;
"person" has the meaning assigned to it in Article 260
of the Constitution;
"personal information" means information about an
identifiable individual, including, but not limited to —
(a) information relating to the race, gender, sex,
pregnancy, marital status, national, ethnic or social
origin, colour, age, physical, psychological or
mental health, well-being, disability, religion,
conscience, belief, culture, language and birth of
the individual;
(b) information relating to the education or the
medical, criminal or employment history of the
individual or information relating to financial
transactions in which the individual has been
involved;
(c) any identifying number, symbol or other particular
assigned to the individual;
(d) the fingerprints, blood type, address, telephone or
other contact details of the individual;
(e) a person's opinion or views over another person;
(f) correspondence sent by the individual that is
implicitly or explicitly of a private or confidential
nature or further correspondence that would reveal
the contents of the original correspondence;
(g) any information given in support or in relation to
an award or grant proposed to be given to another
person;
(h) contact details of an individual.
"private body" means any private entity or non-state
actor that—

-- 5 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
(a) receives public resources and benefits, utilizes
public funds, engages in public functions, provides
public services, has exclusive contracts to exploit
natural resources (with regard to said funds,
functions, services or resources); or
(b) is in possession of information which is of
significant public interest due to its relation to the
protection of human rights, the environment or
public health and safety, or to exposure of
corruption or illegal actions or where the release of
the information may assist in exercising or
protecting any right;
" public entity" means—
(a) any public office, as defined in Article 260 of the
Constitution; or
(b) any entity performing a function within a
commission, office, agency or other body
established under the Constitution;
"public officer" has the same meaning assigned to it
by Article 260 of the Constitution;
"public record" includes any record in written or any
other form containing information relating to the conduct
of the public entity's business, prepared, owned, used or
retained by a public entity regardless of physical form or
characteristics;
"secretary" has the meaning assigned to it by section 2
of the Commission on Administrative Justice Act, 2011;
"State" has the meaning assigned to it under Article
260 of the Constitution".
3. The object and purpose of this Act is to—
(a) give effect to the right of access to information by
citizens as provided under Article 35 of the
Constitution;
(b) provide a framework for public entities and private
bodies to proactively disclose information that
they hold and to provide information on request in
line with the constitutional principles;
(c) provide a framework to facilitate access to
information held by private bodies in compliance
No. 31
Object and purpose
of the Act.

-- 6 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
with any right protected by the Constitution and
any other law;
(d) promote routine and systematic information
disclosure by public entities and private bodies on
constitutional principles relating to accountability,
transparency and public participation and access to
information;
(e) provide for the protection of persons who disclose
information of public interest in good faith; and
(f) provide a framework to facilitate public education
on the right to access information under this Act.
PART II — RIGHT TO INFORMATION
4. (1) Subject to this Act and any other written law,
every citizen has the right of access to information held by —
(a) the State; and
(b) another person and where that information is
required for the exercise or protection of any right
or fundamental freedom.
(2) Subject to this Act, every citizen's right to access
information is not affected by —
(a) any reason the person gives for seeking access; or
(b) the public entity's belief as to what are the
person's reasons for seeking access.
(3) Access to information held by a public entity or a
private body shall be provided expeditiously at a reasonable
cost.
(4) This Act shall be interpreted and applied on the basis
of a duty to disclose and non-disclosure shall be permitted
only in circumstances exempted under section 6.
(5) Nothing in this Act shall limit the requirement
imposed under this Act or any other written law on a public
entity or a private body to disclose information.
5. (1) Subject to section 6, a public entity shall —
(a) facilitate access to information held by such entity
and which information may include —
(i) the particulars of its organization, functions
and duties;
Right to
information.
Disclosure of
information by
public entities.

-- 7 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
(ii) the powers and duties of its officers and
employees;
(iii) the procedure followed in the decision
making process, including channels of
supervision and accountability;
(iv) salary scales of its officers by grade;
(v) the norms set by it for the discharge of its
functions;
(vi) guidelines used by the entity in its dealings
with the public or with corporate bodies,
including the rules, regulations, instructions,
manuals and records, held by it or under its
control or used by its employees for
discharging its functions; and
(vii) a guide sufficient to enable any person
wishing to apply for information under this
Act to identify the classes of information held
by it, the subjects to which they relate, the
location of any indexes to be inspected by
any person;
(b) during the year commencing on first January next
following the first publication of information
under paragraph (a), and during each succeeding
year, cause to be published statements updating
the information contained in the previous
statement or statements published under that
paragraph;
(c) publish all relevant facts while formulating
important policies or announcing the decisions
which affect the public, and before initiating any
project, or formulating any policy, scheme,
programme or law, publish or communicate to the
public in general or to the persons likely to be
affected thereby in particular, the facts available to
it or to which it has reasonable access which in its
opinion should be known to them in the best
interests of natural justice and promotion of
democratic principles;
(d) provide to any person the reasons for any decision
taken by it in relation to that person;
No. 31

-- 8 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
(e) upon signing any contract, publish on its website
or through other suitable media the following
particulars in respect of the contract entered into-
(i) the public works, goods acquired or rented,
and the contracted service, including any
sketches, scopes of service and terms of
reference;
(ii) the contract sum;
(iii) the name of the service provider, contractor
or individual to whom the contract has been
granted; and
(iv) the periods within which the contract shall be
completed.
(2) Information shall be disseminated taking into
consideration the need to reach persons with disabilities,
the cost, local language, the most effective method of
communication in that local area, and the information shall
be easily accessible and available free or at cost taking into
account the medium used.
(3) At a minimum, the material referred to in
subsection (1) shall be made available —
(a) for inspection by any person without charge;
(b) by supplying a copy to any person on request for
which a reasonable charge to cover the costs of
copying and supplying them may be made; and
(c) on the interne, provided that the materials are held
by the authority in electronic form.
(4) Subsection (1)(a) shall come into operation twelve
months after the commencement of this Act.
6. (1) Pursuant to Article 24 of the Constitution, the
right of access to information under Article 35 of the
Constitution shall be limited in respect of information whose
disclosure is likely to—
(a) undermine the national security of Kenya;
(b)impede the due process of law;
(c) endanger the safety, health or life of any person;
(d) involve the unwarranted invasion of the privacy of
an individual, other than the applicant or the
Limitation of right
of access to
information.

-- 9 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
person on whose behalf an application has, with
proper authority, been made;
(e) substantially prejudice the commercial interests,
including intellectual property rights, of that entity
or third party from whom information was
obtained;
(f) cause substantial harm to the ability of the
Government to manage the economy of Kenya;
(g) significantly undermine a public or private entity's
ability to give adequate and judicious
consideration to a matter concerning which no
final decision has been taken and which remains
the subject of active consideration;
(h) damage a public entity's position in any actual or
contemplated legal proceedings; or
(i) infringe professional confidentiality as recognized
in law or by the rules of a registered association of
a profession.
(2) For purposes of subsection (1)(a), information
relating to national security includes —
(a) military strategy, covert operations, doctrine,
capability, capacity or deployment;
(b) foreign government information with implications
on national security;
(c) intelligence activities, sources, capabilities,
methods or cryptology;
(d) foreign relations;
(e) scientific, technology or economic matters relating
to national security;
(0 vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems,
installations, infrastructures, projects, plans or
protection services relating to national security;
(g) information obtained or prepared by any
government institution that is an investigative
body in the course of lawful investigations
relating to the detection, prevention or
suppression of crime, enforcement of any law
and activities suspected of constituting threats
to national security;
No. 31

-- 10 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
(h) information between the national and county
governments deemed to be injurious to the
conduct of affairs of the two levels of government;
(i) cabinet deliberations and records;
(j) information that should be provided to a State
organ, independent office or a constitutional
commission when conducting investigations,
examinations, audits or reviews in the
performance of its functions;
(k) information that is referred to as classified
information in the Kenya Defence Forces Act; and
(1) any other information whose unauthorized
disclosure would prejudice national security.
(3) Subsection (1)(d) and (e) shall not apply if a
request for information relates to the results of any product
or environmental testing, and the information concerned
reveals a serious public safety or environmental risk.
(4) Despite anything contained in subsections (1) and
(2), a public entity or private body may be required to
disclose information where the public interest in disclosure
outweighs the harm to protected interests as shall be
determined by a Court.
(5) A public entity is not obliged to supply
information to a requester if that information is reasonably
accessible by other means.
(6) In considering the public interest referred in
subsection (4), particular regard shall be had to the
constitutional principles on the need to —
(a) promote accountability of public entities to the
public;
(b) ensure that the expenditure of public funds is
subject to effective oversight;
(c) promote informed debate on issues of public
interest ;
(d) keep the public adequately informed about the
existence of any danger to public health or safety
or to the environment; and
(e) ensure that any statutory authority with regulatory
responsibilities is adequately discharging its
functions.

-- 11 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
(7) Unless the contrary is proved by the public entity
or private body, information is presumed not to be exempt
if the information has been held for a period exceeding
thirty years.
PART III—ACCESS TO INFORMATION
7. (1) A chief executive officer of a public entity shall
be an information access officer for purposes of this Act.
(2) A chief executive officer of a public entity may
delegate the performance of his or her duties as an
information access officer under this Act to any officer of the
public entity.
8. (1) An application to access information shall be
made in writing in English or Kiswahili and the applicant
shall provide details and sufficient particulars for the public
officer or any other official to understand what information is
being requested.
(2) Where an applicant is unable to make a written
request for access to information in accordance with
subsection (1) because of illiteracy or disability, the
information officer shall take the necessary steps to ensure
that the applicant makes a request in manner that meets
their needs.
(3) The information officer shall reduce to writing, in
a prescribed form the request made under subsection (2)
and the information officer shall then furnish the applicant
with a copy of the written request.
(4) A public entity may prescribe a form for making
an application to access information, but any such form
shall not be such as to unreasonably delay requests or place
an undue burden upon applicants and no application may
be rejected on the ground only that the applicant has not
used the prescribed form.
9. (1) Subject to section 10, a public officer shall make
a decision on an application as soon as possible, but in any
event, within twenty one days of receipt of the application
(2) Where the information sought concerns the life or
liberty of a person, the information officer shall provide the
information within forty-eight hours of the receipt of the
application.
No. 31
Designation of
information access
officer.
Application for
access.
Processing of
application.

-- 12 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
(3) The information officer to whom a request is made
under subsection (2) may extend the period for response on
a single occasion for a period of not more than fourteen
days if —
(a) the request is for a large amount of information or
requires a search through a large amount of
information and meeting the stipulated time would
unreasonably interfere with the activities of the
information holder; or
(b) consultations are necessary so as to comply with
the request and the consultations cannot be
reasonably completed within the stipulated time.
(4) As soon as the information access officer has made
a deci.'ion as to whether to provide access to information,
he or slac shall immediately communicate the decision to
the requester, indicating —
(a) whether or not the public entity or private body
holds the information sought;
(b) whether the request for information is approved:
(c) if the request is declined the reasons for making
that decision, including the basis for deciding that
the information sought is exempt, unless the
reasons themselves would be exempt information;
and
(d) if the request is declined, a statement about how
the requester may appeal to the Commission";
(5) A public officer referred to in subsection (1) may
seek the assistance of any other public officer as the first
mentioned public officer considers necessary for the proper
discharge of his or her duties and such other public officer
shall render the required assistance.
(6) Where the applicant does not receive a response to
an application within the period stated in subsection (1),
the application shall be deemed to have been rejected.
10. (1) An information access officer may, not later than
five days from the date of receipt of an application, transfer
the application or any relevant part of it, to another public
entity, if the information requested is held by that other
public entity.
(2) Where an application is transferred under
subsection (1), an information access officer shall inform
Transfer of
application.

-- 13 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
the applicant immediately but in any event not later than
seven days from the date of receipt of the application,
about such transfer.
(3) A public entity to which an application is referred
by an information access officer under subsection (1) shall
make a decision on the application within twenty-one days
from the date that the application was first made.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply with the
necessary modification to an application for access to
information that is made to a private body to which this Act
applies.
11. (1) Where a decision is taken to provide the
information applied for, an information access officer shall
send to the applicant a written response within fifteen
working days of receipt of the application, advising —
(a) that the application has been granted;
(b) that the information will be contained in an edited
copy, where applicable;
(c) the details of any fees or further fees to be paid for
access, together with the calculations made to
arrive at the amount of the fee;
(d) the method of payment of such fees, if any;
(e) the proposed process of accessing the information
once the payment if any is made; and
(f) that an appeal may be made to the Commission in
respect of the amount of fees required or the form
of access proposed to be provided.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), upon receipt of the fee
payable, an information access officer shall provide the
information to the applicant or permit the relevant
inspection immediately but in any event not later than two
working days from the date of receipt of the payment.
(3) Any information to be made accessible to an
applicant shall be produced forthwith at the place where it
is kept, for inspection in the form in which it is held unless
the applicant requests that it be made available in another
form and, if it is practicable to do so, such information may
be copied, reproduced or used for conversion to a sound
transmission at the expense of the applicant.
No. 31
Providing access to
information.

-- 14 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
(4) Where a request for information is to a private
body, subsections (1), (2), and (3) shall apply with
necessary changes made.
12. (1) No fee may be levied in relation to the
submission of an application.
(2) A public entity or private body from which an
application for access to information has been made may
charge a prescribed fee for the provision of the information
and the fee shall not exceed the actual costs of making
copies of such information and if applicable, supplying
them to the applicant.
(3) Subject to subsection (2), the Cabinet Secretary
shall make regulations prescribing the fees payable for
expenses incurred in providing information to an applicant.
13. (1) At the request of the applicant, a public entity or
private body shall within reasonable time, at its own expense,
correct, update or annotate any personal information held by
it relating to the applicant, which is out of date, inaccurate or
incomplete.
(2) A request under this section shall be made in
writing to the public entity responsible for the maintenance
of the record system containing the out of date, inaccurate
or incomplete information and shall —
(a) state that it is a request to amend certain personal
information relating to the applicant;
(b) specify the personal information that is to be
amended indicating how such information is out of
date, inaccurate or incomplete; and
(c) specify the remedy sought by the applicant.
PART IV—REVIEW OF DECISIONS BY THE
COMMISSION
14. (1) Subject to subsection (2), an applicant may
apply in writing to the Commission requesting a review of
any of the following decisions of a public entity or private
body in relation to a request for access to information—
(a) a decision refusing to grant access to the
information applied for;
(b) a decision granting access to information in edited
form;
Fees.
Correction of
information.
Review of decisions
by the Commission.

-- 15 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
(c) a decision purporting to grant access, but not
actually granting the access in accordance with an
application;
(d) a decision to defer providing the access to
information;
(e) a decision relating to imposition of a fee or the
amount of the fee;
(f) a decision relating to the remission of a prescribed
application fee;
(g) a decision to grant access to information only to a
specified person; or
(h) a decision refusing to correct, update or annotate
a record of personal information in accordance
with an application made under section 13.
(2) An application under subsection (1) shall be made
within thirty days, or such further period as the
Commission may allow, from the day on which the
decision is notified to the applicant.
(3) The Commission may, on its own initiative or
upon request by any person, review a decision by a public
entity refusing to publish information that it is required to
publish under this Act.
(4) The procedure for submitting a request for a
review by the Commission shall be the same as the
procedure for lodging complaints with the Commission
stipulated under section 22 of this Act or as prescribed by
the Commission.
15.In reviewing a decision in terms of this Act, the
Commission may, where necessary, give notice to any third
party to whom the information relates unless the necessary
steps to locate the third party have been unsuccessful.
16. (1) A person shall not be penalized in relation to any
employment, profession, voluntary work, contract,
membership of an organization, the holding of an office or in
any other way, as a result of having made or proposed to
make a disclosure of information which the person obtained
in confidence in the course of that activity, if the disclosure is
of public interest.
No. 31
Notice to interested
party.
Protection of person
making disclosure,

-- 16 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
(2) For purposes of subsection (1), a disclosure which
is made to a law enforcement agency or to an appropriate
public entity shall be deemed to be made in the public
interest.
(3) A person shall make a disclosure under subsection
(1) or (2) where such person has reasonable belief in the
veracity of the information.
(4) Any person who provides false information
maliciously intended to injure another person commits an
offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding
five hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding three years, or to both.
(5) Disclosure of information under subsection (1) and
(2) includes information on —
(a) violations of the law, including human rights
violations;
(b) mismanagement of funds;
(c) conflict of interest;
(d) corruption;
(e) abuse of public office; and
(f) dangers of public health, safety and the
environment.
(6) For the purpose of this section, a person is
penalized if the person is dismissed, discriminated against,
made the subject of reprisal or other form of adverse
treatment or is denied any appointment, promotion or
advantage that otherwise would have been provided or any
other personnel action provided under the law relating to
whistle blower, and the imposition of any such penalty in
contravention of this section shall be actionable as a tort.
(7) Any term of any settlement arising from a claim
under this section, insofar as it purports to impose an
obligation of confidentiality on any party to the settlement
in respect of information which is accurate and which was
or was proposed to be disclosed, shall be unenforceable.
(8) In any proceedings for an offence for
contravention of any statutory prohibition or restriction on
the disclosure of information, it shall be a defence to show
that-

-- 17 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
(a) in the circumstances, the disclosure was in the
public interest; and
(b) where the offence is alleged to have been
committed by a public officer or Government
contractor and involves the disclosure of
information obtained by the person in the
person's position as such, the defendant had,
before making the disclosure, complied with the
provisions of subsection (3).
17. (1) In this section, "records" means documents or
other sources of information compiled, recorded or stored in
written form or in any other manner and includes electronic
records.
(2) Every public entity shall keep and maintain—
(a) records that are accurate, authentic, have integrity
and useable; and
(b) its records in a manner which facilitates the right
of access to information as provided for in this
Act.
No. 31
Management of
records.
(3) At a minimum, to qualify to have complied with
the duty to keep and maintain records under subsection (2),
every public entity shall —
(a) create and preserve such records as are necessary
to document adequately its policies, decisions,
procedures, transactions and other activities it
undertakes pertinent to the implementation of its
mandate;
(b) ensure that records in its custody, including those
held in electronic form, are maintained in good
order and condition; and
(c) not later than three years from the date from which
this Act begins to apply to it, computerize its
records and information management systems in
order to facilitate more efficient access to
information.
18. (1) Where an application to access information has
been made to a public entity under section 8 and the
applicant would have been entitled, subject to payment of
any fee, to provision of any information in accordance with
Offence of
alteration,
defacement,
blocking, erasure,
etc.

-- 18 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
that section, any person to whom this section applies
commits an offence if he alters, defaces, blocks, erases,
destroys or conceals any record held by the public entity,
with the intention of preventing the disclosure by that entity
of all, or any part, of the information provision of which the
applicant would have been entitled.
(2) Subsection (1) applies to the public entity and to
any person who, is employed by, is an officer of, or is
subject to the direction of, the public entity.
(3) A person convicted of an offence under subsection
(1) shall be liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred
thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year, or to both.
19. Where any information provided by a public entity
or private body to an applicant under section 11 was supplied
to the public entity or private body by a third person, the
publication to the applicant of any defamatory matter
contained in the information shall be privileged unless the
publication is shown to have been made with malice.
PART V— CONFERMENT ON THE COMMISSION
OF OVERSIGHT AND ENFORCEMENT FUNCTIONS
AND POWERS
20. (1) The Commission is hereby granted the powers
of oversight and enforcement of this Act.
(2) In the performance of its functions under this Act,
the Commission shall be guided by the national values and
principles of the Constitution.
(3) The Commission shall designate one of the
Commissioners as "Access to Information Commissioner"
with specific responsibility of performing the functions
assigned to the Commission under this Act.
21. (1) The functions of the Commission shall be to—
(a) investigate, on its initiative or upon complaint
made by any person or group of persons, violation
of the provisions of this Act;
(b) request for and receive reports from public entities
with respect to the implementation of this Act and
of the Act relating to data protection and to assess
and act on those reports with a view to assessing
Defamatory matter
in information
released.
Role of the
Commission.
Functions of the
Commission.

-- 19 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
and evaluating the use and disclosure of
information and the protection of personal data;
(c) develop and facilitate public education awareness
and develop programmes on right to access to
information and right to protection of personal
data;
(d) work with public entities to promote the right to
access to information and work with other
regulatory bodies on promotion and compliance
with data protection measures in terms of
legislation;
(e) monitor state compliance with international treaty
obligations relating to freedom of and right of
access to information and protection of personal
data;
(f) hear and determine complaints and review
decisions arising from violations of the right to
access to information;
(g) promote protection of data as provided for under
this Act or the Constitution; and
(h) perform such other functions as the Commission
may consider necessary for the promotion of
access to information and promotion of data
protection.
(2) The Commission shall have all the powers as are
provided for under this Act, its constitutive Act and the
Constitution as are necessary for the performance of its
functions under this Act.
(3) The decisions of the Commission shall be binding
on the national and county governments.
22. (1) A person wishing to lodge a complaint under
this Act shall do so orally or in writing to the secretary or
such other person as may be duly authorized by the
Commission for that purpose.
(2) A complaint lodged under subsection (1) shall be
in such form and contain such particulars as the
Commission may, from time to time, prescribe.
(3) Upon receipt of a complaint under subsection (1),
the Commission may—	ay—
No. 31
Inquiry	Inquiry into
complaints.

-- 20 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
(a) call for information or a report regarding such
complaint from the public entity or any other body
within such reasonable time as may be specified
by the Commission and —
(i) if the information or report called for is not
received within the time stipulated by the
Commission, the Commission may proceed to
inquire into the complaint without such
information or report; and
(ii) if on receipt of the information or report the
Commission is satisfied either that no further
action is required or that the required action
has been initiated by the public entity, the
Commission shall, in writing, inform the
complainant accordingly and take no further
action; or
(b) without prejudice to paragraph (a), initiate such
inquiry as it considers necessary, having regard to
the nature of the complaint.
23. (1) In the performance of its functions under this
Act, the Commission shall have the power to—
(a) issue summonses or other orders requiring the
attendance of any person before the Commission
and the production of any document or record
relevant to any investigation by the Commission;
(b) question any person in respect of any subject
matter under investigation before the Commission;
and
(c) require any person to disclose any information
within such person's knowledge relevant to any
investigation by the Commission.
(2) The Commission may, if satisfied that there has
been an infringement of the provisions of this Act, order —
(a) the release of any information withheld
unlawfully;
(b) a recommendation for the payment of
compensation; or
(c) any other lawful remedy or redress.
(3) A person who is not satisfied with an order made
by the Commission under subsection (2) may appeal to the
Powers of the
Commission.

-- 21 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
High Court within twenty-one days from the date the order
was made.
(4) An order of the Commission under subsection (2)
may be filed in the High Court by any party thereto in such
manner as the Commission may, in regulations made in
consultation with the Chief Justice, prescribe and such
party shall give written notice of the filing of the order to
all other parties within thirty days of the date of the filing
of the order.
(5) If no appeal is filed under subsection (3), the party
in favour of whom the order is made by the Commission
may apply ex-parte by summons for leave to enforce such
order as a decree, and the order may be executed in the
same manner as an order of the High Court to the like
effect.
(6) Public entities and relevant private bodies shall
provide to the Commission such reports as required by the
Act.
(7) The Commission shall, in consultation with the
public, develop and publicize guidelines detailing the
reporting requirements including the manner, means and
timeframes that apply to public entities and relevant private
bodies.
(8) The Commission may request any further
information from the public entity or the relevant private
body to facilitate and enhance monitoring at any time and
may issue an order compelling the provision of such further
information.
24. (1) The Commission may, for the purpose of
conducting any investigation pertaining to an inquiry, utilize
the services of any public officer or investigation agency of
the Government and where a public officer is so utilized
under this subsection, the Commission shall pay such
expenses as may be incurred by the public officer or agency
for the service rendered.
(2) For the purpose of investigating any matter
pertaining to an inquiry, a public servant or agency whose
services are utilized under subsection (1) may, subject to
the direction and control of the Commission—
(a) summon and enforce the attendance of any person
for examination;
No. 31
Powers relating to
investigation.

-- 22 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
(b) require the discovery and production of any
information;
(c) subject to the provisions of this Act, requisition
any public records or copy thereof from any public
officer; and
(d) take a statement under oath in relation to any
investigation it is undertaking.
(3) The provisions of section 23 shall apply in
relation to any statement made by a person before any
public officer or agency whose services are utilized under
subsection (1) as they apply in relation to any statement
made by a person in the course of giving evidence before
the Commission.
(4) The public officer or agency whose services are
utilized under subsection (1) shall investigate into any
matter pertaining to the inquiry and submit a report thereon
to the Commission in that behalf.
(5) The Commission shall satisfy itself on the
correctness of the facts stated and the conclusion, if any,
arrived at in the report submitted to it under subsection (4)
and for that purpose, the Commission may make such
inquiry, including the examination of any person who
conducts or assists in the investigation, as it considers
necessary.
PART VI—PROVISIONS ON DELEGATED POWERS
25. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may, in consultation
with the Commission, make regulations, prescribing
anything required by this Act to be prescribed or generally
for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act .
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection
(1), the regulations may provide for —
(a) the manner in which applications under this Act
shall be made;
(b) the form in which information requested under
this Act shall be supplied;
(c) the making of an application for personal
information by representatives of the person to
whom the information relates;
Regulations.

-- 23 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
(d) the measures to be taken by public entities to
facilitate the exercise by persons of their rights
under this Act;
(e) the measures to be taken by public entities to
ensure that adequate records are created and
maintained by the entities;
(f) the procedures for the making of an application by
a complainant for the review by the Commission,
of a decision made by a public entity relating to
access to information;
(g) the procedure to be followed by a public
entity in consulting with a third party before
giving access to information obtained by it from
that party;
(h) the procedures requiring a public entity to
ensure that personal information is accurate;
(i) compensation to be sought by an individual
who has suffered damage as a result of the
holding of inaccurate information about the
individual's personal affairs by a public entity;
(j) the records that public entities shall be required
to keep; or
(k) such matters as are contemplated by or
necessary for giving full effect to this Act
and for its due administration.
(3) For the purposes of Article 94 (6) of the
Constitution —
(a) the purpose and objective of the delegation under
this section is to enable the Cabinet Secretary to
make regulations for better carrying into effect the
provisions of this Act;
(b) the authority of the Cabinet Secretary to make
regulations under this Act shall be limited to
bringing into effect the provisions of this Act and
fulfilment of the objectives specified under this
section;
(c) the principles and standards applicable to the
delegated power referred to under this section are
those found in—
No. 31
No. 23 of 2013.
Cap 2.

-- 24 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
(i) the Statutory Instruments Act, 2013;
(ii) the Interpretation and General Provisions Act,
(iii) the general rules of international law as
specified under Article 2(5) of the
Constitution; and
(iv) any treaty and convention ratified by Kenya
under Article 2(6) of the Constitution.
PART VII — MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
26. (1) The Commission shall submit an annual report
to Parliament and may, at any time, submit special reports to
the Cabinet Secretary on any matter relating to any of its
functions.
(2) The annual report submitted by the Commission
under subsection (1) shall include an overall assessment by
the Commission of the performance of the Government
with regard to access to information during the period
under review.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall lay the annual report
of the Commission before Parliament within two months of
receipt thereof, with any comments thereon which the
Cabinet Secretary considers necessary.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall be required, in every
year, to report to Parliament the steps which the
Government has taken in implementing recommendations
made in the Commission's reports.
27. On or before the 30th day of June of each year,
every public entity shall submit to the Commission a report
covering the preceding year, which shall include —
(a) the number of requests for information received by
the entity and the number of requests processed;
(b) the number of determinations made by the
authority not to comply with the requests for
information under section 8, and the main grounds
for such determinations;
(c) the average number of days taken by the entity to
process different types of requests;
(d) the total amount of fees collected by the public
entity while processing requests; and
Annual reports.
Reports by public
entities.

-- 25 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information No. 31
(e) the number of full-time staff of the public entity
devoted to processing requests for information and
the total amount expended by the entity for
processing such requests.
28.(1) Any person who knowingly discloses exempt Offences and
information in contravention of this Act commits an offence penalties.
and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one
million shillings, or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years, or both.
(2) It shall be a defence to a charge under subsection
(1) that the exempt information disclosed was already in the
public domain at the time of disclosure.
(3) An information access officer who —
(a) refuses to assist a requester who is unable to write to
reduce the oral request to writing in the prescribed
form and provide a copy to the applicant in
accordance with section 8(2);
(b) refuses to accept a request for information;
(c) fails to respond to a request for information within
the prescribed time; or
(d) fails to comply with the duty to take reasonable
steps to make information available in a form that is
capable of being read, viewed or heard by a
requester with disability in accordance with section
1 1 (3),
commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand shillings, or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, or both.
(4) Any person who —
(a) charges a fee exceeding the actual costs of making
copies of such information and supplying them to
the applicant;
(b) fails to respond to a request for information required
for the exercise or protection of a right in
accordance with the requirements of this Act;
(c) fails to respond to a request to correct personal
information; or
(d) it having been ascertained that information held is

-- 26 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
out of date, inaccurate or incomplete, fails within
the prescribed time, or within a reasonable time if
no time is prescribed, to correct, destroy or delete
the information, or to attach a statement to the
information in accordance with section 13,
commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand shillings, or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding six months, or both.
(5) Any person who is convicted of an offence under
section 18(3) after a request has been made for disclosure of
the information in question, with the intention of preventing
the disclosure of that information in response to that request
is liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand
shillings or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years, or to both.
(6) Any relevant private body that fails to make publicly
available the name and contact details of its information
access officer or officers commits and offence and is liable
on conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand
shillings.
(7) Any relevant private body that is convicted, or any
officer of which is convicted of an offence under this Act, or
which, although not convicted is in serious breach of this Act
may, after a fair hearing, be debarred from entering into any
future contract with government under the laws relating to
matters of procurement and disposal.
(8) A person who —
(a) fails to attend before the Commission in accordance
with any summons or order issued under subsection
23 (1)(a);
(b) knowingly gives any false or misleading statement
of information to the Commission; or
(c) causes an obstruction or disturbance in the course of
any proceedings before the Commission,
commits an offence and shall be liable, on conviction, to a
fine not exceeding three hundred thousand shillings, or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to
both.
(9) A person shall not be criminally liable for the
disclosure or authorisation of the disclosure made in good
faith in reliance on this Act.

-- 27 of 29 --

2016 Access to Information
(10) A person to whom information is disclosed under
this Act, conveys that information to others but who alters
the information, or conceals part of the information or
misrepresents the information, with intent to deceive,
commits an offence, and is liable on conviction to fine not
exceeding two hundred thousand shillings or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or to both.
29. The written laws identified in the Schedule are Consequential
amendments
amended in the manner identified therein.
SCHEDULE (s. 29)
CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS
Records Disposal Act
1. (1) This paragraph amends the Records Disposal Cap. 14
Act.
(2) Section 2 of the Act is amended by deleting the
words "Chief Archivist" wherever they appear and
substituting therefor the expression "Kenya National
Archives and Documentation Service and the Commission
on Administrative Justice".
Public Archives and Documentation Service Act
2. (1) This paragraph amends the Public Archives and
Documentation Service Act.
(2) Section 5A of the Act is amended by inserting the
following new proviso immediately after the word "public"
appearing in the last line of subsection (1) —
"Provided that the restriction from circulation shall
only relate to exempt information provided for in section 6".
(3) The Act is amended in section 6 by deleting
subsections (2) and (3).
(4) Section 7 of the Act is amended by inserting the
expression "in consultation with the Commission on
Administrative Justice and" immediately before the words
"with the approval of the Minister".
Public Officer Ethics Act, 2003
3. (1) This paragraph amends the Public Officer Ethics
Act, 2003.
(2) Section 41 of the Act is amended by inserting the
following proviso immediately after the word "both"
appearing in the last line —
Cap. 19
No. 4 of 2003
No. 31

-- 28 of 29 --

No. 31 Access to Information 2016
"Provided that the provision of this section as to
divulging of information without lawful excuse shall only
apply to exempt information provided for in section 6."
Official Secrets Act
4. (1) This paragraph amends the Official Secrets Act.
(2) Section 3 of the Official Secrets Act is amended
by inserting the following new subsection immediately
after subsection (7) —
(8) The provisions of this section shall apply subject
to Article 35 of the Constitution and the law relating to
access to information.
Statistics Act, 2006
5. (1) This paragraph amends the Statistics Act, 2006.
(2) Section 11 of the Act be amended by inserting the
following new proviso immediately after the word "Act"
appearing in the last line —
"Provided that the provision of this section as to
secrecy shall only apply to exempt information provided
for in section 6 of the Freedom of Information Act, 2012."
Cap. 187
No. 4 of 2006

-- 29 of 29 --