LAWS OF KENYA
COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
No. 17 of 2012
Revised Edition 2012
Published by the National Council for Law Reporting
with the Authority of the Attorney-General
www.kenyalaw.org

-- 1 of 76 --

-- 2 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
3 [Issue 1]
NO. 17 OF 2012
COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Section
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Interpretation.
3. Object and purpose of the Act.
4. County symbols.
PART II – COUNTY GOVERNMENTS
5. Functions of county governments.
6. Powers of county governments.
PART III – COUNTY ASSEMBLY
7. Membership of the county assembly.
8. Role of the county assembly.
9. Role of members of the county assembly.
10. County assembly party leaders.
11. Removal of speaker from office.
12. The county assembly service board.
13. Clerk and staff of the county assembly.
14. Procedure and committees of the county assembly.
15. Right to petition county assembly.
16. Freedom of speech and debate.
17. Powers, privileges and immunities of a county assembly.
18. Official languages of a county assembly.
19. Quorum.
20. Voting in a county assembly.
21. Procedure for the exercise of legislative powers.
22. Bill to have a title.
23. Publication of a Bill.
24. Assenting to a Bill.
25. Coming into force of a law.
PART IV – ELECTORAL WARDS
26. Number and delimitation of electoral Wards, etc.
27. Recall of a county assembly member.
28. Petition for recall.
29. Recall elections.
PART V – COUNTY EXECUTIVE
30. Functions and responsibilities of a county governor.
31. Powers of the governor.

-- 3 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 4
Section
32. Functions of the deputy governor.
33. Removal of a governor.
34. Exercise of executive authority.
35. Appointment of county executive members.
36. Functions of the executive committee.
37. Role of executive committee in urban area or city planning.
38. Oath of office for the executive committee.
39. Accountability of members of the executive committee.
40. Removal of member of executive committee.
41. Meetings of the county executive committee.
42. County executive to remain in office after elections.
43. Representation of county government by Attorney-General in court.
44. Appointment of county secretary.
45. Appointment of county chief officers.
46. County executive committee to determine organisation of county.
47. Performance management plan.
PART VI – DECENTRALIZED UNITS
48. Decentralized units.
49. Urban areas and cities structures.
50. Office of the sub-county administrator.
51. Establishment of the office of Ward administrator.
52. Establishment of the office of village administrator.
53. Village council.
54. Structures of decentralization.
PART VII – COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE
55. Objectives.
56. County to have county public service.
57. Establishment of the County Public Service Board.
58. Composition of the County Public Service Board.
59. Functions and powers of a County Public Service Board.
60. Criteria for establishment of public offices, etc.
61. Criteria for abolition of public offices.
62. Powers of the County Public Service Board to establish or abolish office.
63. Powers of the County Public Service Board to make appointments.
64. No unqualified person may be appointed in acting capacity.
65. Matters to take into account during appointments, etc.
66. Advertisements of positions to be widely publicised.
67. Appointments to be in writing.
68. Board to maintain records of applicants.
69. Re-designation of officers.
70. Provisions on appointments to apply to promotions.
71. Confirmation of appointment on lapse of period.
72. Power to deploy public officers.
73. Secondments.

-- 4 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
5 [Issue 1]
Section
74. County Public Service Board to regulate appointment of persons on contract.
75. Action on irregularity of process.
76. Prohibition of punishment contrary to the Constitution.
77. Appeals to the Public Service Commission.
78. Resignation, retirement, etc.
79. Grounds for retirement.
80. Prescription of retirement on age.
81. Retirement on the ground of ill health.
82. Retirement on grounds of abolition of office.
83. Retirement on grounds of public interest.
84. Retirement pursuant to agreement or special retirement scheme.
85. Entitlement to apply for review.
86. Delegation by County Public Service Board.
PART VIII – CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
87. Principles of citizen participation in counties.
88. Citizens right to petition and challenge.
89. Duty to respond to citizens’ petitions or challenges.
90. Matters subject to local referenda.
91. Establishment of modalities and platforms for citizen participation.
92. Part to apply to decentralized units.
PART IX – PUBLIC COMMUNICATION AND ACCESS TO INFORMATION
93. Principles of public communication.
94. Objectives of county communication.
95. County communication framework.
96. Access to information.
97. Inclusion and integration of minorities and marginalized groups.
PART X – CIVIC EDUCATION
98. Principles of civic education.
99. Purpose and objectives of civic education.
100. Design and implementation of civic education.
101. Institutional framework for civic education.
PART XI – COUNTY PLANNING
102. Principles of planning and development facilitation.
103. Objectives of county planning.
104. Obligation to plan by the county.
105. Planning in the county.
106. Integrating national and county planning.
107. Types and purposes of county plans.
108. County integrated development plan.
109. County sectoral plans.
110. County spatial plans.
111. City or municipal plans.
112. Amending county integrated development plans.

-- 5 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 6
Section
113. Giving effect to the county integrated development plan.
114. Planning for nationally significant projects in a county.
115. Public participation in county planning.
PART XII – DELIVERY OF COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICES
116. Principles of public services delivery in the county.
117. Standards and norms for public service delivery.
118. Shared services.
119. Citizen’s Service Centre.
120. Tariffs and pricing of public services.
121. Support to county governments.
PART XIII – PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT
122. Grounds for suspension arising from conflict or war.
123. Suspension of county government in exceptional circumstances.
124. Prorogation of the county assembly.
125. Suspension of the county executive committee.
126. Establishment of the Interim County Management Board.
127. Functions of the Interim County Management Board.
128. Dissolution of the Interim County Management Board.
129. Termination of suspension.
130. County elections after suspension.
PART XIV – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
131. Financial provision.
132. Pension schemes.
133. Protection against personal liability.
134. Repeal of Cap. 265.
135. Regulations.
PART XV – TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
136. First sitting of the county assembly.
137. Facilitation of civic education.
138. Arrangements for public servants.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE – OATHS OF OFFICE
SECOND SCHEDULE – MATTERS TO BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE COUNTY
ASSEMBLY STANDING ORDERS

-- 6 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
7 [Issue 1]
NO. 17 OF 2012
COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
[Date of assent: 24th July, 2012.]
[Date of commencement: See Section 1.]
An Act of Parliament to give effect to Chapter Eleven of the Constitution; to
provide for county governments' powers, functions and responsibilities
to deliver services and for connected purposes
[Act No. 17 of 2012.]]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement
This Act may be cited as the County Governments Act, 2012 and shall come
into operation upon the final announcement of the results of the first elections
under the Constitution.
2. Interpretation
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
“analysis of functions” means processes of and mechanisms for,
reviewing and reassigning powers and competencies between the national
government and county governments in accordance with the provisions of the
Constitution generally and in particular, the provisions of the Fourth Schedule
thereto;
“apex body” means the body established under the law governing inter-
governmental relations;
“appointment” includes an acting appointment, reappointment, promotion
and re-designation;
“authorized officer” includes—
(a) the holder of the office of county chief officer in a county
department; or
(b) in case of a department that is not assigned or under direct
administration of a county chief officer, the head of that department;
and
(c) any other public officer appointed by the County Public Service
Board to be an authorized officer with respect to a specified public
body including a city or urban area;
“Cabinet Secretary” means the Cabinet Secretary responsible for
matters relating to inter-governmental relations;
“code of conduct” means any written standard issued by a lawful
authority to guide the conduct of any county public officer or category of
county public officers;

-- 7 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 8
“competencies” means powers given to a public authority in respect of a
specific activity which is key to ensuring the provision of a public service and
includes powers of planning, regulating, setting standards, constructing,
financing, managing, monitoring and evaluating, sanctioning or intervening in
any way to ensure that a function is discharged;
“conditions of service” includes any criterion or circumstance or factor
for a person’s—
(a) appointment, secondment, deployment, promotion or discipline with
respect to a public office;
(b) retention in employment as a public officer; or
(c) remunerative, retirement and other benefits;
“Constitution” means the Constitution of Kenya, 2010;
“county assembly” means a county assembly established under Article
176 of the Constitution;
“county assembly member” means a member elected or nominated in
accordance with Article 177(1) of the Constitution;
“county chief officer” means a county chief officer appointed under
section 45;
“county executive committee” means a county executive committee
established in accordance with Article 176 of the Constitution;
“county Gazette” means a gazette published by the authority of the
county government or a supplement of such gazette;
“county government” means the county government provided for under
Article 176 of the Constitution;
“county government election” means an election of governor and
county assembly members;
“county public office” means an office in the county public service or an
office in a public body but does not include any office specifically exempted by
the Constitution from the powers of the county government;
“county public officer” means any person appointed by the county
government and holding or acting in any county public office whether paid,
unpaid, or on contractual or permanent terms but does not include a person
engaged on a part-time basis in a county public body paid at an hourly or daily
rate;
“county public service” means the collectivity of all individuals
performing functions within any department of the county government or its
agency, but does not include the governor, deputy governor, members of the
county executive committee and the members of the county assembly;
“deputy governor” means a person nominated by the governor in
accordance with Article 180 of the Constitution;
“disciplinary control” means the imposition of any punishment against a
public officer on account of breach of a code of conduct;

-- 8 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
9 [Issue 1]
“GIS based database system” means a geographical information
management system that integrates hardware, software and data for
capturing, managing, analyzing and displaying forms of geographically
referenced information;
“governor” means a county governor elected in accordance with Article
180 of the Constitution;
“input indicator” means an indicator that measures the costs, resources
or time used to produce an output;
“marginalised group” has the meaning assigned to it by Article 260 of
the Constitution;
“merit” when used with reference to a person who is a candidate for
appointment, promotion or re-designation to a county public office, means—
(a) the abilities, qualifications and personal qualities required to satisfy
any prescribed criteria for appointments in the county public service,
or to carry out the duties of the county public office; and
(b) the person’s potential for development;
“outcome indicator” means an indicator that measures the quality or
impact of an output in achieving a particular objective;
“output indicator” means an indicator that measures the results of
activities, processes and strategies of programmes or projects of a county
government;
“promotion” means the conferment upon a person in the county public
service of an office to which is attached a higher salary or salary scale than
that attached to the previous office substantively held by that person;
“public officer” has the meaning assigned to it in Article 260 of the
Constitution;
“qualification” means any prescribed factor of eligibility or ineligibility
attached to holding or acting in a county public office;
“re-designation” means the conferment upon a person, of a county public
office at a grade equal to or substantially equal to the one previously held by
that person and whose major consequence is to change from one cadre to the
other to facilitate that person’s horizontal mobility characterized with change in
career path;
“retirement” means the removal of an officer from the public service with
full separation benefits including pension benefits, gratuity or such other
terminal benefits as may be provided for in the applicable law or the contract
of service or a special retirement scheme agreed upon between the public
officer and the relevant lawful authority;
“Salaries and Remuneration Commission” means the Salaries and
Remuneration Commission established under Article 230(1) of the
Constitution;
“secondment” means a temporary leave from discharging the duties of a
county public office with a view of the concerned county public officer being
employed outside the county public service or in another public body;

-- 9 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 10
“shared services” means—
(a) the centralisation at a county or other level of those administrative
functions of a county that could be performed by different units
including matters such as supply chain management, human
resource management, information technology, purchasing,
inventory, payroll, hiring, and information technology; or
(b) partnerships between counties, a county or counties and national
government and public private partnerships to deliver a specified set
of public services;
“speaker” means the speaker of a county assembly elected under Article
178 of the Constitution;
“the public”, when used in relation to public participation in this Act,
means—
(a) the residents of a particular county;
(b) the rate payers of a particular city or municipality;
(c) any resident civic organisation or non-governmental, private sector
or labour organization with an interest in the governance of a
particular county, city or municipality;
(d) non-resident persons who because of their temporary presence in a
particular county, city or municipality make use of services or
facilities provided by the county, city or municipality;
“urban area” means an area designated as such under the Urban Areas
and Cities Act (No. 13 of 2011) as contemplated in Article 184 of the
Constitution;
“Ward” means an electoral unit within a constituency delimited in
accordance with Article 89 of the Constitution and any other relevant law; and
“Ward representative” means a county assembly member representing a
particular Ward.
3. Object and purpose of the Act
The object and purpose of this Act is to—
(a) provide for matters necessary or convenient to give effect to
Chapter Eleven of the Constitution pursuant to Article 200 of the
Constitution;
(b) give effect to the objects and principles of devolution as set out in
Articles 174 and 175 of the Constitution;
(c) give effect to Article 176(2) of the Constitution in respect of further
decentralization;
(d) provide for the removal from office of the speaker of the county
assembly in accordance with Article 178 of the Constitution;
(e) provide for the powers, privileges and immunities of county
assemblies, their committees and members under Article 196 of the
Constitution;

-- 10 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
11 [Issue 1]
(f) provide for public participation in the conduct of the activities of the
county assembly as required under Article 196 of the Constitution;
(g) seek to ensure that the community and cultural diversity of a county
is reflected in its county assembly and county executive committee
as contemplated in Article 197 of the Constitution;
(h) prescribe mechanisms to protect minorities within counties pursuant
to Article 197 of the Constitution;
(i) prescribe additional requirements in respect of the publication of
county legislation as contemplated in Article 199 of the Constitution;
(j) provide, pursuant to Article 200 of the Constitution, for—
(i) the manner of nomination or appointment of persons to, and
their removal from, offices in county governments, including
the qualifications of voters and candidates;
(ii) the procedure of assemblies and executive committees
including the chairing and frequency of meetings, quorums
and voting; and
(iii) the suspension of assemblies and executive committees;
(k) prescribe, pursuant to Article 235 of the Constitution, uniform norms
and standards, for—
(i) establishing and abolishing offices in the county public service;
(ii) appointing persons to hold or act in those offices, and
confirming appointments; and
(iii) exercising disciplinary control over and removing persons
holding or acting in those offices; and
(l) provide for the promotion, evaluation and reporting on the
compliance by county public officers with the values and principles
in Articles 10 and 232 of the Constitution.
4. County symbols
(1) Every county shall enact legislation prescribing the following county
symbols—
(a) the county flag;
(b) county coat of arms; and
(c) the county public seal.
(2) The County Executive shall develop the symbols of the county through a
consultative process for approval by the county assembly by legislation.
(3) The county legislation enacted under subsection (1) shall provide for the
use of the county symbols in the same manner as provided for in the National
Flag, Emblems and Names Act (Cap. 99).
(4) A county symbol shall not be the same as, or bear a likeness or similarity
to a national symbol.

-- 11 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 12
PART II – COUNTY GOVERNMENTS
5. Functions of county governments
(1) A county government shall be responsible for any function assigned to it
under the Constitution or by an Act of Parliament.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), a county government
shall be responsible for—
(a) county legislation in accordance with Article 185 of the Constitution;
(b) exercising executive functions in accordance with Article 183 of the
Constitution;
(c) functions provided for in Article 186 and assigned in the Fourth
Schedule of the Constitution;
(d) any other function that may be transferred to county governments
from the national government under Article 187 of the Constitution;
(e) any functions agreed upon with other county governments under
Article 189(2) of the Constitution; and
(f) establishment and staffing of its public service as contemplated
under Article 235 of the Constitution.
(3) A county government may seek assistance from the Kenya Law Reform
Commission in the development or reform of county legislation under subsection
(2)(a).
6. Powers of county governments
(1) As an entity exercising constitutional authority, a county government shall
be a body corporate with perpetual succession and shall have all the powers
necessary for the discharge of its functions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), a county government
may—
(a) enter into a contract;
(b) acquire, purchase or lease any land; or
(c) delegate any of its functions to its officers, decentralised units or
other entities within the county.
(3) A county government may enter into partnerships with any public or
private organization in accordance with the provisions of any law relating to
public or private partnerships for any work, service or function for which it is
responsible within its area of jurisdiction.
(4) All contracts lawfully entered into under this section shall be valid and
binding on the county government, its successors and assigns.
(5) To ensure efficiency in the delivery of service or carrying out of a function
for which the county government is responsible, the county government may—
(a) establish a company, firm or other body for the delivery of a
particular service or carrying on of a particular function; or
(b) contract any person, company, firm or other body for the delivery of
a particular service or carrying on a particular function.

-- 12 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
13 [Issue 1]
(6) In exercising its powers or performing any of its functions a county
government shall ensure efficiency, effectiveness, inclusivity and participation of
the people.
PART III – COUNTY ASSEMBLY
7. Membership of the county assembly
(1) In addition to the members who are elected under Article 177(a), or
nominated under Article 177(b) of the Constitution, a county assembly shall
comprise—
(a) six nominated members as contemplated in Article 177(c) of the
Constitution; and
(b) the speaker, who is an ex officio member elected in accordance with
Article 178 of the Constitution.
(2) The political party nominating persons under subsection (1) shall ensure
that—
(a) community and cultural diversity of the county is reflected in the
county assembly; and
(b) there is adequate representation to protect minorities within the
county in accordance with Article 197 of the Constitution.
(3) The number of members nominated under subsection (1)(a) shall be
reviewed to accord with the number of Wards determined by the Independent
Electoral and Boundaries Commission under section 27(3)(a).
8. Role of the county assembly
(1) The county assembly shall—
(a) vet and approve nominees for appointment to county public offices
as may be provided for in this Act or any other law;
(b) perform the roles set out under Article 185 of the Constitution;
(c) approve the budget and expenditure of the county government in
accordance with Article 207 of the Constitution, and the legislation
contemplated in Article 220(2) of the Constitution, guided by Articles
201 and 203 of the Constitution;
(d) approve the borrowing by the county government in accordance with
Article 212 of the Constitution;
(e) approve county development planning; and
(f) perform any other role as may be set out under the Constitution or
legislation.
(2) If a county assembly fails to enact any particular legislation required to
give further effect to any provision of this Act, a corresponding national
legislation, if any, shall with necessary modifications apply to the matter in
question until the county assembly enacts the required legislation.

-- 13 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 14
9. Role of members of the county assembly
(1) A member of a county assembly shall—
(a) maintain close contact with the electorate and consult them on
issues before or under discussion in the county assembly;
(b) present views, opinions and proposals of the electorate to the
county assembly;
(c) attend sessions of the county assembly and its committees;
(d) provide a linkage between the county assembly and the electorate
on public service delivery; and
(e) extend professional knowledge, experience or specialised
knowledge to any issue for discussion in the county assembly.
(2) A member of the county assembly shall not be directly or indirectly
involved in the—
(a) executive functions of the county government and its administration;
or
(b) delivery of services as if the member were an officer or employee of
the county government.
(3) Members of a county assembly shall be sworn in by the county assembly
clerk within fourteen days, after the announcement of the final results of an
election, in the manner set out in the Schedule to this Act.
(4) At any time in the absence of the speaker of the county assembly or in
matters that directly affect the speaker, the county assembly shall elect a
member to act as speaker as contemplated under Article 178(2)(b) of the
Constitution.
(5) Unless otherwise removed, the first member elected under subsection (4),
shall, in the absence of the Speaker, preside over the sittings of the assembly for
the term of the county assembly.
10. County assembly party leaders
(1) There shall be in each county assembly a leader of the majority party and
a leader of the minority party.
(2) The leader of the majority party shall be the person who is the leader of
the largest party or coalition of parties in the county assembly.
(3) The leader of the minority party shall be the person who is the leader of
the second largest party or coalition of parties in the county assembly.
(4) A county assembly shall observe the following order of precedence—
(a) the speaker of the county assembly;
(b) the leader of the majority party; and
(c) the leader of the minority party.
11. Removal of speaker from office
(1) A speaker of a county assembly may be removed from office by the
county assembly through a resolution supported by not less than seventy five
percent of all the members of the county assembly.

-- 14 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
15 [Issue 1]
(2) A notice of the intention to move a motion for a resolution to remove the
speaker shall be given in writing to the clerk of the county assembly, signed by at
least one third of all the members of the county assembly stating the grounds for
removal.
(3) A motion for a resolution to remove the speaker shall be presided over by
a member of the county assembly elected under section 9(4).
(4) Before the debate and voting on a motion under subsection (3), the
speaker shall be accorded an opportunity to respond to the allegations on the
floor of the county assembly.
12. The county assembly service board
(1) There shall be a county assembly service board for each county
assembly.
(2) The county assembly service board shall be a body corporate with
perpetual succession and a common seal.
(3) The county assembly service board shall consist of—
(a) the Speaker of the county assembly as the chairperson;
(b) the leader of the majority party or a member of the county assembly
deputed by him or her, as the vice-chairperson;
(c) the leader of the minority party or a member of the county assembly
deputed by him or her; and
(d) one person resident in the county, appointed by the county
assembly from among persons who have knowledge and
experience in public affairs, but who is not a member of the county
assembly.
(4) The county assembly clerk shall be the secretary to the county assembly
service board.
(5) A member of the county assembly service board shall vacate office—
(a) if the person is a member of the county assembly—
(i) at the end of the term of the county assembly; or
(ii) if the person ceases to be a member of the county assembly;
or
(b) if the person is an appointed member, on revocation of the person’s
appointment by the county assembly; or
(c) if the person is the Speaker, leader of majority party or leader of
minority party when the person ceases to be such Speaker, leader
of majority party or leader of minority party.
(6) Despite subsection (5), when the term of the county assembly ends, a
member of the county assembly service board under subsection (3)(d) shall
continue in office until a new member has assumed office in the member’s place
in the next assembly.
(7) The county assembly service board is responsible for—
(a) providing services and facilities to ensure the efficient and effective
functioning of the county assembly;

-- 15 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 16
(b) constituting offices in the county assembly service, and appointing
and supervising office holders;
(c) preparing annual estimates of expenditure of the county assembly
service and submitting them to the county assembly for approval,
and exercising budgetary control over the service;
(d) undertaking, singly or jointly with other relevant organizations,
programmes to promote the ideals of parliamentary democracy; and
(e) performing other functions—
(i) necessary for the well-being of the members and staff of the
county assembly; or
(ii) prescribed by national legislation.
13. Clerk and staff of the county assembly
(1) There shall be a clerk of the county assembly, appointed by the county
assembly service board with the approval of the county assembly.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a clerk of the county
assembly unless such person—
(a) is a citizen of Kenya;
(b) holds a degree from a university recognised in Kenya or its
equivalent;
(c) has had at least five years relevant professional experience;
(d) meets the requirements of leadership and integrity set out in
Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) The functions and powers of a Clerk of Parliament shall with necessary
modifications be the functions and powers of the clerk of a county assembly.
(4) For the purposes of this Act, the clerk of a county assembly is an
authorized officer.
(5) The office of the clerk of the county assembly and the offices of members
of the staff of the clerk of the county assembly shall be offices in the county
assembly service board.
(6) The remuneration of the clerk and staff of the county assembly shall be
determined by the county assembly service board upon the advice of the
Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
14. Procedure and committees of the county assembly
(1) A county assembly—
(a) may make standing orders consistent with the Constitution and this
Act regulating the procedure of the county assembly including, in
particular, orders for the proper conduct of proceedings; and
(b) subject to standing orders made under paragraph (a), may establish
committees in such manner and for such general or special
purposes as it considers fit, and regulate the procedure of any
committee so established.

-- 16 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
17 [Issue 1]
(2) The county assembly proceedings are valid despite—
(a) there being a vacancy in its membership at the particular time; or
(b) the presence or participation at the particular time of a person not
entitled to be present at, or to participate in, the proceedings of the
county assembly.
(3) In considering any appointment for which approval of the county assembly
is required under the Constitution, an Act of Parliament or county legislation—
(a) the appointment shall be considered first by a committee of the
county assembly;
(b) the committee’s recommendation shall be tabled before the county
assembly for approval; and
(c) the proceedings of the committee and the county assembly shall be
open to the public.
(4) The county assembly shall in establishing committees under this section
ensure that each member of the county assembly is appointed to at least one
committee.
(5) A county assembly may jointly with another county assembly, establish
committees consisting of members of both county assemblies.
(6) If a county assembly establishes a joint committee with another county
assembly, the election of members and regulation of the conduct of the business
of the joint committee shall be as agreed between the two county assemblies.
(7) Until a county assembly makes its standing orders under subsection (1),
the standing orders of the National Assembly shall, with the necessary
modifications, apply to that county assembly.
(8) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the Standing Orders
made under this section shall provide for the matters specified in the Second
Schedule.
15. Right to petition county assembly
(1) A person has a right to petition a county assembly to consider any matter
within its authority, including enacting, amending or repealing any of its
legislation.
(2) Each county assembly shall prescribe a procedure for exercising the right
under subsection (1).
16. Freedom of speech and debate
No civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted in any court or tribunal
against a member of a county assembly by reason of any matter said in any
debate, petition, motion or other proceedings of the county assembly.
17. Powers, privileges and immunities of a county assembly
The national law regulating the powers and privileges of Parliament shall, with
the necessary modifications, apply to a county assembly.

-- 17 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 18
18. Official languages of a county assembly
(1) The official languages of a county assembly shall be Kiswahili, English
and Kenyan sign language and the business of the county assembly may be
conducted in English, Kiswahili and Kenyan sign language.
(2) No business of the county assembly or any of its committees or other
organs may be conducted or transacted in a language other than the official
languages.
(3) In case of a conflict between different language versions of a county
legislation, the version in which the legislation was originally enacted prevails.
(4) The verbatim report of the proceedings of a county assembly shall be
recorded in the official language in which it was presented.
19. Quorum
The quorum of a county assembly is one third of all the members of the
county assembly.
20. Voting in a county assembly
(1) Except as otherwise provided in the Constitution, in this Act or in other
legislation, any question proposed for decision by the county assembly shall be
determined by a majority of the members of the county assembly present and
voting.
(2) On a question proposed for decision by a county assembly—
(a) the speaker of the county assembly has no vote; and
(b) in the case of a tie, the question is lost.
(3) A member of a county assembly shall—
(a) at all times observe the principles of integrity including those set out
in Chapter Six of the Constitution; and
(b) promptly declare to the speaker any interest that the member has in
any matter being discussed in the county assembly.
(4) A member of a county assembly shall not vote on any question in which
the member has a pecuniary interest.
21. Procedure for the exercise of legislative powers
(1) A county assembly shall exercise its legislative power through Bills
passed by the county assembly and assented to by the governor.
(2) A Bill may be introduced by any member or committee of the county
assembly, but a money Bill may be introduced only in accordance with
subsection (4).
(3) In the case of a money Bill, the county assembly may proceed only in
accordance with the recommendation of the relevant committee of the county
assembly after taking into account the views of the county executive committee
member responsible for finance.

-- 18 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
19 [Issue 1]
(4) For the purposes of this Act, “money Bill” means a Bill that contains
provisions dealing with—
(a) taxes;
(b) the imposition of charges on a public fund or the variation or repeal
of any of those charges;
(c) the appropriation, receipt, custody, investment or issue of public
money;
(d) the raising or guaranteeing of any loan or its repayment; or
(e) matters incidental to any of those matters.
22. Bill to have a title
A Bill introduced in the county assembly shall be identified by a title placed at
the beginning of the Bill and the title shall include the subject matter of the statute
to be enacted.
23. Publication of a Bill
A Bill shall be published by including the Bill as a supplement in the county
Gazette and the Kenya Gazette.
24. Assenting to a Bill
(1) The Speaker shall, within fourteen days, forward a Bill passed by the
county assembly to the governor.
(2) The governor shall within fourteen days after receipt of a Bill—
(a) assent to the Bill; or
(b) refer the bill back to the county assembly with a memorandum
outlining reasons for the referral.
(3) If the governor refers a Bill back to the county assembly, the county
assembly may, following the appropriate procedures under this section—
(a) amend the Bill taking into account the issues raised by the governor;
or
(b) pass the Bill without amendment.
(4) If a county assembly amends the Bill taking into consideration the issues
raised by the governor, the speaker shall within fourteen days submit the Bill to
the governor for assent.
(5) If a county assembly passes the Bill a second time, without amendment,
or with amendments which do not accommodate the governor’s concerns by a
vote supported by two-thirds of members of the county assembly, the speaker
shall within seven days re-submit the Bill to the governor and the governor shall
within seven days assent to the Bill.
(6) If the governor does not assent to a Bill or refer it back within the period
referred to under this section, the Bill shall be taken to have been assented to on
the expiry of that period.

-- 19 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 20
25. Coming into force of a law
(1) A legislation passed by the county assembly and assented to by the
governor shall be published in the county Gazette and Kenya Gazette within
seven days after assent.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), the county assembly legislation shall come into
force on the fourteenth day after its publication in the county Gazette and Kenya
Gazette, whichever comes earlier, unless the legislation stipulates a different
date on or time at which it shall come into force.
(3) A county assembly legislation that confers a direct benefit whether
financial or in kind on members of the county assembly shall come into force
after the next general election of members of the county assembly.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply to an interest that members of county
assembly have as members of the public.
PART IV – ELECTORAL WARDS
26. Number and delimitation of electoral Wards, etc.
(1) There shall be not more than one thousand four hundred and fifty
electoral Wards for purposes of the election of county assembly members.
(2) For purposes of the first general elections under the Constitution, the
Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (in this Part referred to as
the “Commission”) shall ensure that each county comprises at least fifteen
Wards.
(3) The Commission shall review the names and boundaries of Wards at
intervals of not less than eight years, and not more than twelve years, but any
review shall—
(a) ensure that no county shall comprise less than twenty-five Wards;
and
(b) be completed at least twelve months before a general election of
county assembly members.
(4) The requirements under subsection (3) above shall not apply to the
review of Ward boundaries preceding the first election under this Act.
(5) If a general election is to be held within twelve months after the
completion of a review by the Commission, the new boundaries shall take effect
in the subsequent election.
(6) The boundaries of each Ward shall be such that the number of inhabitants
in the Ward is, as nearly as possible, equal to the population quota, but the
number of inhabitants of a Ward may be more or less than the population quota
in the manner mentioned in subsection (7) to take account of—
(a) geographical features and urban centres;
(b) community of interest, historical, economic and cultural ties; and
(c) means of communication.

-- 20 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
21 [Issue 1]
(7) The number of inhabitants of a Ward may be more or less than the
population quota by a margin of not more than—
(a) forty per cent for cities and sparsely populated areas; or
(b) thirty per cent for the other areas.
(8) In reviewing Ward boundaries, the Commission shall—
(a) consult all interested parties; and
(b) progressively work towards ensuring that the number of inhabitants
in each constituency and Ward is, as nearly as possible, equal to
the population quota.
27. Recall of a county assembly member
(1) The electorate in a county ward may recall their member of the county
assembly before the end of the term of the member on any of the grounds
specified in subsection (2).
(2) A member of a county assembly may be recalled where the member—
(a) is found, after due process of the law, to have violated the
provisions of Chapter Six of the Constitution;
(b) is found, after due process of the law, to have mismanaged public
resources;
(c) is convicted of an offence under the Elections Act (No. 24 of 2011).
(3) A recall of a member of the county assembly under subsection (1) shall
only be initiated upon a judgment or finding by the High Court confirming the
grounds specified in subsection (2).
(4) A recall under subsection (1) shall only be initiated twenty-four months
after the election of the member of the county assembly and not later than twelve
months immediately preceding the next general election.
(5) A recall petition shall not be filed against a member of the county
assembly more than once during the term of that member in the county
assembly.
(6) A person who unsuccessfully contested an election under the Elections
Act (No. 24 of 2011) shall not be eligible, directly or indirectly, to initiate a petition
under this section.
28. Petition for recall
(1) A recall under section 27 shall be initiated by a petition which shall be filed
with the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission and which shall
be—
(a) in writing;
(b) signed by a petitioner who—
(i) is a voter in the Ward in respect of which the recall is sought;
and

-- 21 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 22
(ii) was registered to vote in the election in respect of which the
recall is sought;
(c) accompanied by an order of the High Court issued in terms of
section 27(3).
(2) The petition referred to in subsection (1) shall—
(a) specify the grounds for the recall as specified under section 27(2);
(b) contain a list of such number of names of voters in the Ward which
shall represent at least thirty percent of the registered voters in that
Ward; and
(c) be accompanied by the fee prescribed for an election petition.
(3) The list of names referred to in subsection (2)(b) shall contain the names,
address, voter card number, national identity card or passport number and
signature of the voters supporting the petition.
(4) The voters supporting a petition under subsection (3) shall represent the
diversity of the people in the Ward.
(5) The petitioner shall collect and submit to the Commission the list of
names under subsection (2)(b) within a period of thirty days after filing the
petition.
(6) The Commission shall verify the list of names within a period of thirty days
of receipt of that list.
(7) The Commission, if satisfied that the requirements of this section are met,
shall within fifteen days after the verification, issue a notice of the recall to the
speaker of the county assembly.
(8) The Commission shall conduct a recall election within the Ward within
ninety days of the publication of the question.
29. Recall elections
(1) Where a member of the county assembly is to be recalled under section
27, the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission shall frame the
question to be determined at the recall election.
(2) A question referred to in subsection (1) shall be framed in such a manner
as to require the answer “yes” or the answer “no”.
(3) The Commission shall assign a symbol for each answer to the recall
question.
(4) The voting at a recall election shall be by secret ballot.
(5) A recall election shall be decided by a simple majority of the voters voting
in the recall election.
(6) Where a recall election results in the removal of a member of the county
assembly, the Commission shall conduct a by-election in the affected Ward.
(7) A member of the county assembly who has been recalled may run in the
by-election conducted under subsection (6).

-- 22 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
23 [Issue 1]
PART V – COUNTY EXECUTIVE
30. Functions and responsibilities of a county governor
(1) The governor shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation as set out
in the Schedule to this Act before assuming office.
(2) Subject to the Constitution, the governor shall—
(a) diligently execute the functions and exercise the authority provided
for in the Constitution and legislation;
(b) perform such State functions within the county as the President may
from time to time assign on the basis of mutual consultations;
(c) represent the county in national and international fora and events;
(d) appoint, with the approval of the county assembly, the county
executive committee in accordance with Article 179(2)(b) of the
Constitution;
(e) constitute the county executive committee portfolio structure to
respond to the functions and competencies assigned to and
transferred to each county;
(f) submit the county plans and policies to the county assembly for
approval;
(g) consider, approve and assent to bills passed by the county
assembly;
(h) chair meetings of the county executive committee;
(i) by a decision notified in the county gazette, assign to every member
of the county executive committee, responsibility to ensure the
discharge of any function within the county and the provision of
related services to the people;
(j) submit to the county assembly an annual report on the
implementation status of the county policies and plans;
(k) deliver annual state of the county address containing such matters
as may be specified in county legislation; and
(l) sign and cause to be published in the county Gazette, notice of all
important formal decisions made by the governor or by the county
executive committee.
(3) In performing the functions under subsection (2), the governor shall—
(a) provide leadership in the county’s governance and development;
(b) provide leadership to the county executive committee and
administration based on the county policies and plans;
(c) promote democracy, good governance, unity and cohesion within
the county;
(d) promote peace and order within the county;
(e) promote the competitiveness of the county;
(f) be accountable for the management and use of the county
resources; and

-- 23 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 24
(g) promote and facilitate citizen participation in the development of
policies and plans, and delivery of services in the county.
31. Powers of the governor
The governor—
(a) may, despite section 40, dismiss a county executive committee
member at any time, if the governor considers that it is appropriate
or necessary to do so;
(b) shall dismiss a county executive committee member, if required to
do so by a resolution of the county assembly as provided under
section 40;
(c) may appoint an accounting officer for each department, entity or
decentralized unit of the county government; and
(d) shall have such powers as may be necessary for the execution of
the duties of the office of governor.
32. Functions of the deputy governor
(1) The deputy governor shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation as
set out in the Schedule to this Act before assuming office.
(2) The deputy governor shall deputize for the governor in the execution of
the governor’s functions.
(3) The governor may assign the deputy governor any other responsibility or
portfolio as a member of the county executive committee.
(4) When acting in office as contemplated in Article 179(5) of the Constitution,
the deputy governor shall not exercise any powers of the governor, to nominate,
appoint or dismiss, that are assigned to the governor under the Constitution or
other written law.
(5) The governor shall not delegate to the deputy governor any of the
functions referred to in subsection (4).
33. Removal of a governor
(1) A member of the county assembly may by notice to the speaker,
supported by at least a third of all the members, move a motion for the removal
of the governor under Article 181 of the Constitution.
(2) If a motion under subsection (1) is supported by at least two-thirds of all
the members of the county assembly—
(a) the speaker of the county assembly shall inform the Speaker of the
Senate of that resolution within two days; and
(b) the governor shall continue to perform the functions of the office
pending the outcome of the proceedings required by this section.
(3) Within seven days after receiving notice of a resolution from the speaker
of the county assembly—
(a) the Speaker of the Senate shall convene a meeting of the Senate to
hear charges against the governor; and

-- 24 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
25 [Issue 1]
(b) the Senate, by resolution, may appoint a special committee
comprising eleven of its members to investigate the matter.
(4) A special committee appointed under subsection (3)(b) shall—
(a) investigate the matter; and
(b) report to the Senate within ten days on whether it finds the
particulars of the allegations against the governor to have been
substantiated.
(5) The governor shall have the right to appear and be represented before
the special committee during its investigations.
(6) If the special committee reports that the particulars of any allegation
against the governor—
(a) have not been substantiated, further proceedings shall not be taken
under this section in respect of that allegation; or
(b) have been substantiated, the Senate shall, after according the
governor an opportunity to be heard, vote on the impeachment
charges.
(7) If a majority of all the members of the Senate vote to uphold any
impeachment charge, the governor shall cease to hold office.
(8) If a vote in the Senate fails to result in the removal of the governor, the
Speaker of the Senate shall notify the speaker of the concerned county assembly
accordingly and the motion by the assembly for the removal of the governor on
the same charges may only be re-introduced to the Senate on the expiry of three
months from the date of such vote.
(9) The procedure for the removal of the President on grounds of incapacity
under Article 144 of the Constitution shall apply, with necessary modifications, to
the removal of a governor.
(10) A vacancy in the office of the governor or deputy governor arising under
this section shall be filled in the manner provided for by Article 182 of the
Constitution.
34. Exercise of executive authority
The county executive committee shall exercise the executive authority—
(a) in accordance with the Constitution and relevant national and county
legislation;
(b) for the well-being and benefit of the people;
(c) taking into account the objects and principles of devolution of
government set out under Articles 174 and 175 of the Constitution;
(d) while enhancing self-governance for communities in the
management of development programs;
(e) while ensuring the protection and promotion of the interests and
rights of minorities and marginalized communities;
(f) while promoting gender equity;
(g) while promoting social and economic development within the
county; and

-- 25 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 26
(h) while ensuring equitable sharing of available resources throughout
the county.
35. Appointment of county executive members
(1) The governor shall, when nominating members of the executive
committee—
(a) ensure that to the fullest extent possible, the composition of the
executive committee reflects the community and cultural diversity of
the county; and
(b) take into account the principles of affirmative action as provided for
in the Constitution.
(2) The county assembly shall not approve nominations for appointment to
the executive committee that do not take into account—
(a) not more than two thirds of either gender;
(b) representation of the minorities, marginalized groups and
communities; and
(c) community and cultural diversity within the county.
(3) A person may be appointed as a member of the county executive
committee if that person—
(a) is a Kenyan citizen;
(b) is a holder of at least a first degree from a university recognised in
Kenya;
(c) satisfies the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution; and
(d) has knowledge, experience and a distinguished career of not less
than five years in the field relevant to the portfolio of the department
to which the person is being appointed.
(4) A member of the county executive committee shall not hold any other
State or public office.
36. Functions of the executive committee
(1) In addition to the functions provided under Article 183 of the Constitution,
a county executive committee shall—
(a) supervise the administration and delivery of services in the county
and all decentralized units and agencies in the county;
(b) perform any other functions conferred on it by the Constitution or
national legislation; and
(c) carry out any function incidental to any of the assigned functions.
(2) In the performance of its functions, a county executive committee shall
have power to determine its own programme of activities and every member of
the committee shall observe integrity and disclosure of interest in any matter
before the committee.

-- 26 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
27 [Issue 1]
37. Role of the executive committee in urban area or city planning
A county executive committee shall—
(a) monitor the process of planning, formulation and adoption of the
integrated development plan by a city or municipality within the
county;
(b) assist a city or municipality with the planning, formulation, adoption
and review of its integrated development plan;
(c) facilitate the coordination and alignment of integrated development
plans of different cities or municipalities within the county and with
the plans, strategies and programmes of national and county
governments; and
(d) take appropriate steps to resolve any disputes or differences in
connection with the planning, formulation, adoption or review of an
integrated development plan.
38. Oath of office for the executive committee
A person appointed as a member of the county executive committee under
Article 179 of the Constitution shall take the prescribed oath or affirmation of
office provided in the Schedule to this Act before assuming office.
39. Accountability of members of the executive committee
(1) The members of the county executive committee are individually and
collectively accountable to the governor in the exercise of their powers and
performance of their duties and responsibilities.
(2) A committee of the county assembly may require a member of the
executive committee to—
(a) attend or appear before the committee; and
(b) answer any question relating to the member’s responsibilities.
40. Removal of member of executive committee
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Governor may remove a member of the
county executive committee from office on any of the following grounds—
(a) incompetence;
(b) abuse of office;
(c) gross misconduct;
(d) failure, without reasonable excuse, or written authority of the
governor, to attend three consecutive meetings of the county
executive committee;
(e) physical or mental incapacity rendering the executive committee
member incapable of performing the duties of that office; or
(f) gross violation of the Constitution or any other law.
(2) A member of the county assembly, supported by at least one-third of all
the members of the county assembly, may propose a motion requiring the
governor to dismiss a county executive committee member on any of the
grounds set out in subsection (1).

-- 27 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 28
(3) If a motion under subsection (2) is supported by at least one-third of the
members of the county assembly—
(a) the county assembly shall appoint a select committee comprising
five of its members to investigate the matter; and
(b) the select committee shall report, within ten days, to the county
assembly whether it finds the allegations against the county
executive committee member to be substantiated.
(4) The county executive committee member has the right to appear and be
represented before the select committee during its investigations.
(5) If the select committee reports that it finds the allegations—
(a) unsubstantiated, no further proceedings shall be taken; or
(b) substantiated, the county assembly shall vote whether to approve
the resolution requiring the county executive committee member to
be dismissed.
(6) If a resolution under subsection (5)(b) is supported by a majority of the
members of the county assembly—
(a) the speaker of the county assembly shall promptly deliver the
resolution to the governor; and
(b) the governor shall dismiss the county executive committee member.
41. Meetings of the county executive committee
(1) The deliberations of all meetings of the county executive committee shall
be recorded in writing.
(2) The quorum of a meeting of a county executive committee shall be more
than one half of its membership.
(3) A resolution of the county executive committee shall be by a majority of
the members present and voting.
(4) A resolution arrived at pursuant to subsection (2) shall be accessible to
the public.
42. County executive to remain in office after elections
(1) When a general election is held for a county government, the outgoing
county executive committee shall remain in office until a new county executive
committee is constituted after the election.
(2) The constitution of a new executive committee after an election under
subsection (1) shall be finalized within twenty-one days of the swearing in of the
members of the county assembly.
43. Representation of county government by Attorney-General in court
A county government may, pursuant to Article 156(4) of the Constitution
request the Attorney-General to represent the county government in court or in
any other legal proceedings to which the county government is a party other than
in criminal proceedings.

-- 28 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
29 [Issue 1]
44. Appointment of county secretary
(1) There is established for each county the office of the county secretary
who shall be secretary to the county executive committee.
(2) The county secretary—
(a) shall be competitively sourced from amongst persons who are
university graduates with at least ten years experience in
administration and management;
(b) shall be nominated from persons competitively sourced under
paragraph (a) by the governor and, with the approval of the county
assembly, appointed by the governor; and
(c) may, subject to the conditions and terms of appointment, be
dismissed by the governor.
(3) The county secretary shall—
(a) be the head of the county public service;
(b) be responsible for arranging the business, and keeping the minutes,
of the county executive committee subject to the directions of the
executive committee;
(c) convey the decisions of the county executive committee to the
appropriate persons or authorities; and
(d) perform any other functions as directed by the county executive
committee.
(4) The county secretary may resign from office by giving thirty days written
notice to the governor.
45. Appointment of county chief officers
(1) The governor shall—
(a) nominate qualified and experienced county chief officers from
among persons competitively sourced and recommended by the
County Public Service Board; and
(b) with the approval of the county assembly, appoint county chief
officers.
(2) The office of a county chief officer shall be an office in the county public
service.
(3) A county chief officer shall be responsible to the respective county
executive committee member for the administration of a county department as
provided under section 46.
(4) The county chief officer shall be the authorized officer in respect of
exercise of delegated power.
(5) The governor may re-assign a county chief officer.
(6) A county chief officer may resign from office by giving notice, in writing, to
the governor.

-- 29 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 30
46. County executive committee to determine organisation of county
(1) The county executive committee shall determine the organization of the
county and its various departments, and for that purpose may—
(a) establish, continue or vary any department, and determine the
objects and purposes of the department;
(b) determine the number and nature of departments at the
decentralized units;
(c) abolish any department; and
(d) determine or change the name of any department.
(2) When establishing and organizing the county, the county executive
committee shall take into account, and be guided by, the need to—
(a) be responsive to the needs of the local community and the functions
and competencies assigned to and transferred to the county;
(b) facilitate a culture of public service and accountability in the county
public service;
(c) be performance oriented and focused on the objects of devolved
government set out in Article 174 of the Constitution;
(d) ensure that the county departments align their roles and
responsibilities with the priorities and objectives set out in the
county’s policies and plans;
(e) organise its departments and other structures in a flexible way in
order to respond to changing priorities and circumstances;
(f) assign clear responsibilities for the management and coordination of
departments and functions;
(g) allow participatory decision making as far as is practicable; and
(h) provide an equitable, fair, open and non-discriminatory working
environment.
47. Performance management plan
(1) The county executive committee shall design a performance management
plan to evaluate performance of the county public service and the implementation
of county policies.
(2) The plan shall provide for among others—
(a) objective, measurable and time bound performance indicators;
(b) linkage to mandates;
(c) annual performance reports;
(d) citizen participation in the evaluation of the performance of county
government; and
(e) public sharing of performance progress reports.
(3) The governor shall submit the annual performance reports of the county
executive committee and public service to the county assembly for consideration.
(4) The performance management plan and reports under this section shall
be public documents.

-- 30 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
31 [Issue 1]
PART VI – DECENTRALIZED UNITS
48. Decentralized units
(1) Subject to subsection (3), the functions and provision of services of each
county government shall be decentralized to—
(a) the urban areas and cities within the county established in
accordance with the Urban Areas and Cities Act (No. 13 of 2011);
(b) the sub-counties equivalent to the constituencies within the county
established under Article 89 of the Constitution;
(c) the Wards within the county established under Article 89 of the
Constitution and section 26;
(d) such number of village units in each county as may be determined
by the county assembly of the respective county; and
(e) such other or further units as a county government may determine.
(2) If the constituency or part of a constituency falls under urban areas or
cities, that constituency or part of the constituency, as the case may be, shall be
considered as falling under subsection (1)(a).
(3) In establishing a village unit under subsection (1)(d), a county assembly
shall take into account the—
(a) population size;
(b) geographical features;
(c) community of interest, historical, economic and cultural ties; and
(d) means of communication.
(4) A county assembly shall enact legislation to provide for the delineation
and establishment of the village units in the county.
(5) Nothing in this Part may be construed as precluding the county
government, through county legislation, from adjusting the units created under
subsection (1) for purposes of further decentralizing its functions and provision of
its services in accordance with Article 176(2) of the Constitution.
49. Urban areas and cities structures
The structures and functions of urban areas and cities shall be as is provided
for in the Urban Areas and Cities Act (No. 13 of 2011).
50. Office of the sub-county administrator
(1) There shall be established at the level of each sub-county the office of the
sub-county administrator.
(2) The sub-county administrator shall have qualifications and knowledge in
administration or management and shall be competitively appointed by the
County Public Service Board in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

-- 31 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 32
(3) The sub-county administrator shall be responsible for the coordination,
management and supervision of the general administrative functions in the sub-
county unit, including—
(a) the development of policies and plans;
(b) service delivery;
(c) developmental activities to empower the community;
(d) the provision and maintenance of infrastructure and facilities of
public services;
(e) the county public service;
(f) exercise any functions and powers delegated by the County Public
Service Board under section 86; and
(g) facilitation and coordination of citizen participation in the
development of policies and plans and delivery of services.
(4) In carrying out the functions and obligations in subsection (3), the sub-
county administrator shall be responsible to the relevant county chief officer.
51. Establishment of the office of Ward administrator
(1) There is established for each Ward in a county the office of the Ward
administrator.
(2) The Ward administrator shall have professional qualifications and
technical knowledge in administration and shall be competitively appointed by the
County Public Service Board in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3) The Ward administrator shall coordinate, manage and supervise the
general administrative functions in the Ward unit, including—
(a) the development of policies and plans;
(b) service delivery;
(c) developmental activities to empower the community;
(d) the provision and maintenance of infrastructure and facilities of
public services;
(e) the county public service;
(f) exercise any functions and powers delegated by the County Public
Service Board under section 86; and
(g) coordination and facilitation of citizen participation in the
development of policies and plans and delivery of services.
(4) In carrying out the functions and obligations in subsection (3), the Ward
administrator shall be responsible to the sub-county administrator.
52. Establishment of the office of village administrator
(1) There is established the office of village administrator for each village unit
established in a county.
(2) A village administrator shall have professional qualifications and technical
knowledge in administration and shall be appointed by the County Public Service
Board in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

-- 32 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
33 [Issue 1]
(3) A village administrator shall coordinate, manage and supervise the
general administrative functions in the village including—
(a) pursuant to paragraph 14 of Part II of the Fourth Schedule to the
Constitution—
(i) ensuring and coordinating the participation of the village unit in
governance; and
(ii) assisting the village unit to develop the administrative capacity
for the effective exercise of the functions and powers and
participation in governance at the local level; and
(b) the exercise of any functions and powers delegated by the County
Public Service Board under section 86.
(4) In carrying out the functions and obligations in subsection (3), a village
administrator shall be responsible to the relevant Ward administrator.
53. Village council
(1) There is established, for each village unit, a village council comprising—
(a) the village administrator who shall be the chairperson of the village
council; and
(b) not less than three and not more than five village elders
competitively appointed by the village administrator with the
approval of the county assembly, taking into account gender
balance.
(2) A village council shall be responsible for—
(a) ensuring and coordinating the participation of the village unit in
governance;
(b) assisting the village unit to develop the administrative capacity for
the effective exercise of the functions and powers and participation
in governance at the local level;
(c) monitoring the implementation of policies at the village unit;
(d) advising the ward administrator and sub-county administrator on
matters pertaining to the village; and
(e) any other function necessary for the better administration of the
village unit.
(3) A person shall be eligible for appointment as a village elder if the
person—
(a) is a citizen of Kenya;
(b) has been a resident of or has been the owner of property in the
respective village unit for a continuous period of not less than five
years prior to the appointment date;
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution; and
(d) is not disqualified for appointment to office by this Act or any other
law.
(4) A village elder shall be paid such allowance as shall be determined by the
respective county assembly.

-- 33 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 34
54. Structures of decentralization
(1) There shall be such further structures of decentralization as may be
provided for in county legislation.
(2) There is established for every county a forum to be known as the county
intergovernmental forum which shall be chaired by the governor or in his
absence, the deputy governor, or in the absence of both, a member of the county
executive committee designated by the governor.
(3) The county intergovernmental forum shall comprise—
(a) the heads of all departments of the national government rendering
services in the county; and
(b) the county executive committee members or their nominees
appointed by them in writing.
(4) The intergovernmental forum shall, pursuant to the Fourth Schedule
(Articles 185(2), 186(1) and 187(2) of the Constitution, be responsible for—
(a) harmonization of services rendered in the county;
(b) coordination of development activities in the county;
(c) coordination of intergovernmental functions; and
(d) such other functions as may be provided for by or under any law.
(5) The governor shall chair such other committee or other forum as may be
established at the county level pursuant to Articles 6(2), 189(2) and 239(5) of the
Constitution.
(6) The governor shall receive regular briefings from county security
committee referred to under section 41(1)(d) of the National Police Service Act,
2011.
PART VII – COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE
55. Objectives
The objectives of this Part are to—
(a) provide for evaluation and reporting on the extent to which the
values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 of the
Constitution are complied with in the county public service;
(b) provide for the organization, staffing and functioning of the county
public service in ways that ensure efficient, quality and productive
services for the people of the county;
(c) provide for institutions, systems and mechanisms for human
resource utilization and development in a manner that best
enhances service delivery by county public service institutions;
(d) provide a framework of uniform norms and standards to be applied
in all counties in respect of—
(i) establishment and abolition of offices in the county public
service;
(ii) appointment of persons to hold or act in those offices;
(iii) confirming appointments; or

-- 34 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
35 [Issue 1]
(iv) exercising disciplinary control over and removal of persons
holding or acting in those offices;
(e) provide for the promotion of the values and principles set out in
Articles 10 and 232 of the Constitution in the county public service;
(f) provide for human resource management and career development
practices;
(g) address staff shortages and barriers to staff mobility between
counties;
(h) provide for standards to promote ethical conduct and
professionalism in county public service;
(i) provide for the establishment of County Public Service Boards; and
(j) make further provisions relating to appeals in respect of county
governments’ public service.
56. County to have county public service
(1) Each county shall, in accordance with Article 235 of the Constitution, have
its own public service to be known as county public service.
(2) The county public service shall be headed by a county secretary
appointed under section 44.
(3) For purposes of subsection (1), the designation county public officer shall
be restricted to an officer appointed by the county government.
57. Establishment of the County Public Service Board
There is established a County Public Service Board in each County, which
shall be—
(a) a body corporate with perpetual succession and a seal; and
(b) capable of suing and being sued in its corporate name.
58. Composition of the County Public Service Board
(1) The County Public Service Board shall comprise—
(a) a chairperson nominated and appointed by the county governor with
the approval of the county assembly;
(b) not less than three but not more than five other members nominated
and appointed by the county governor, with the approval of the
county assembly; and
(c) a certified public secretary of good professional standing nominated
and appointed by the governor, with the approval of the county
assembly, who shall be the secretary to the board.
(2) The appointment of the members of the Board shall be through a
competitive process.
(3) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as a member under
subsection (1) if that person—
(a) satisfies the provisions of Chapter Six of the Constitution;
(b) is not a state or public officer;

-- 35 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 36
(c) in the case of chairperson or vice-chairperson, possesses a
minimum qualification of a bachelor’s degree from a recognised
university and working experience of not less than ten years; and
(d) in the case of any other members—
(i) possesses a minimum of a bachelor’s degree from a
recognised university and working experience of not less than
five years; and
(ii) is a professional, demonstrates absence of breach of the
relevant professional code of conduct.
(4) A member of the Board shall—
(a) hold office for a non-renewable term of six years; and
(b) may serve on a part-time basis.
(5) The members of the Board may only be removed from office—
(a) on grounds set out for the removal of members of a constitutional
commission under Article 251(1) of the Constitution; and
(b) by a vote of not less than seventy five percent of all the members of
the county assembly.
(6) The board shall elect a vice-chairperson from amongst its members.
(7) The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be of opposite gender.
59. Functions and powers of a County Public Service Board
(1) The functions of the County Public Service Board shall be, on behalf of
the county government, to—
(a) establish and abolish offices in the county public service;
(b) appoint persons to hold or act in offices of the county public service
including in the Boards of cities and urban areas within the county
and to confirm appointments;
(c) exercise disciplinary control over, and remove, persons holding or
acting in those offices as provided for under this Part;
(d) prepare regular reports for submission to the county assembly on
the execution of the functions of the Board;
(e) promote in the county public service the values and principles
referred to in Articles 10 and 232;
(f) evaluate and report to the county assembly on the extent to which
the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are
complied with in the county public service;
(g) facilitate the development of coherent, integrated human resource
planning and budgeting for personnel emoluments in counties;
(h) advise the county government on human resource management and
development;
(i) advise county government on implementation and monitoring of the
national performance management system in counties;

-- 36 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
37 [Issue 1]
(j) make recommendations to the Salaries and Remuneration
Commission, on behalf of the county government, on the
remuneration, pensions and gratuities for county public service
employees.
(2) In appointing a person as a secretary to a board of a city or an urban area
under subsection (1)(a), the County Public Service Board shall ensure that such
person is a certified public secretary of good professional standing.
(3) The reports under subsection (1)(d) shall contain the details of persons
appointed including gender, persons with disabilities, persons from the minority
and marginalized communities.
(4) In the performance of its functions under subsection (1)(e), the County
Public Service Board shall have powers to—
(a) inform and educate county public officers and the public about the
values and principles;
(b) recommend to the county government effective measures to
promote the values and principles;
(c) assist county government in the formulation and implementation of
programmes intended to inculcate in public officers the duty to
uphold the values and principles;
(d) advise the county governments on their obligations under
international treaties and conventions on good governance in the
county public service;
(e) visit any county public office or body with a view to assessing and
inspecting the status of compliance with the values and principles;
(f) investigate, on its own initiative or upon a complaint made by any
person or group of persons, the violation of any values and
principles;
(g) recommend to the relevant lawful authority, any necessary action in
view of the violation of the values and principles by any person or
public body;
(h) cooperate with other institutions working in the field of good
governance in the public service; and
(i) perform any other functions as the Board considers necessary for
the promotion of the values and principles.
(5) The report by the County Public Service Board under subsection (1)(f)
shall—
(a) be delivered each December to the county assembly;
(b) include all the steps taken and decisions made by the board;
(c) include specific recommendations that require to be implemented in
the promotion and protection of the values and principles;
(d) include specific decisions on particulars of persons or public body
who have violated the values and principles, including action taken
or recommended against them;
(e) include any impediment in the promotion of the values and
principles; and

-- 37 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 38
(f) include the programmes the board is undertaking or has planned to
undertake in the medium term towards the promotion of the values
and principles.
(6) The Board shall publish a report required under this section in the county
Gazette not later than seven days after the report has been delivered to the
county assembly.
60. Criteria for establishment of public offices, etc.
(1) The County Public Service Board shall establish a public office within the
county public service if it is satisfied that—
(a) the establishment of the public office shall serve public interest in
line with the core functions of the county government;
(b) there exists no other public office in the county public service
discharging or capable of discharging the duties for which the
county is requested to establish another office;
(c) upon the establishment of the office, the office shall be vacant to be
filled competitively and transparently in accordance with the
prescribed appointment or promotion procedures;
(d) the establishment of the office including its level of grading,
qualification and remuneration shall not disadvantage similar offices
in the county public service or occasion unfair competition for staff
among county public bodies;
(e) the establishment of the office shall not confer unfair advantage to a
group of or individual serving public officers;
(f) the county government entity has prudently utilized offices
previously provided in its establishment; and
(g) funding for the office to be established is duly provided for.
(2) In determining the provision of funding under subsection (1)(g), the
County Public Service Board shall take due regard to the need to limit the
component of personnel emoluments to a level that does not adversely affect
other budgetary provisions in the recurrent vote.
(3) A written request for establishment of an office complying with the
conditions in this section shall be submitted to the Board by the concerned head
of department.
(4) In deciding whether or not to establish a public office, the County Public
Service Board shall take into account—
(a) the overall workload in the county public service concerned; and
(b) the suitability of that department but not any other to be the domicile
of the public office to be established.
61. Criteria for abolition of public offices
(1) The County Public Service Board shall abolish a public office when it is
satisfied that—
(a) the abolition of the public office shall serve the public interest in view
of the core functions of the county government;

-- 38 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
39 [Issue 1]
(b) there exists another public office in the county public service
discharging or capable of discharging the duties of the office which
the county government is requested to abolish;
(c) the abolition of the office in view of its level is necessary so as to—
(i) eliminate unfair competition for staff among county public
service departments; and
(ii) to promote parity of treatment among officers of similar
qualifications holding public offices with the same
responsibilities;
(d) the abolition of the office shall not confer unfair advantage to a
group of, or individual public officer; or
(e) the county government or office has been reorganized or abolished.
(3) Any decision by the County Public Service Board to abolish an office in
the county public service shall be subject to the due process of removing or
retiring the affected public officer including adherence to the principles of natural
justice, unless the affected public officer has been re-deployed to another office.
62. Powers of the County Public Service Board to establish or abolish
office
(1) Taking into account the provisions of this Part, the County Public Service
Board on its own motion, may establish or abolish any office in the county public
service.
(2) If the Board intends to establish or abolish an office it shall submit its
proposal to the county assembly for approval through the county executive
committee member responsible for the county public service.
(3) The County Public Service Board shall give the county chief officer of the
concerned department an opportunity to make representation in respect of any
action to be taken under this section before making the decision in that regard.
(4) If the County Public Service Board establishes an office and the
concerned department fails to fill the vacancy for a period of twelve months after
its establishment, the office shall stand abolished and the County Public Service
Board shall not be required to make a decision to abolish that office.
63. Powers of the County Public Service Board to make appointments
(1) Except as provided for in the Constitution or legislation, the County Public
Service Board has the power to make appointments including promotions in
respect of offices in the county public service.
(2) The power of the County Public Service Board under subsection (1) shall
be exercised—
(a) at the request of the relevant county chief officer of the department
to which the appointment is to be made;
(b) at the request of the clerk of the county assembly; or
(c) on the County Public Service Board’s own motion on account of
best interest of the county public service and parity of treatment of
public officers taking into account the circumstances of each case.

-- 39 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 40
64. No unqualified person may be appointed in acting capacity
(1) A person shall not be appointed to hold a public office in an acting
capacity unless the person satisfies all the prescribed qualifications for holding
that public office.
(2) Acting appointments shall be made only by the lawful appointing authority
and for a specified period.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent a public officer from—
(a) delegating a duty for which the law does not prohibit delegation; or
(b) deploying another officer to perform duties vested in another office
during a temporary absence.
(4) Any delegation or deployment under subsection (3) shall—
(a) be made by an officer who is qualified and competent to perform the
duty; and
(b) not undermine the expeditious appointment or deployment of a
competent person to the public office concerned.
(5) If it comes to the attention of the County Public Service Board that a
public officer has purportedly made an acting appointment, delegation or
deployment as the case may be, contrary to the provisions of this section, the
County Public Service Board shall take the necessary corrective action.
65. Matters to take into account during appointments, etc.
(1) In selecting candidates for appointment, the County Public Service Board
shall consider—
(a) the standards, values and principles set out in Articles 10, 27(4),
56(c) and 232(1) of the Constitution;
(b) the prescribed qualifications for holding or acting in the office;
(c) the experience and achievements attained by the candidate;
(d) the conduct of the candidate in view of any relevant code of
conduct, ethics and integrity;
(e) the need to ensure that at least thirty percent of the vacant posts at
entry level are filled by candidates who are not from the dominant
ethnic community in the county;
(f) the need for open and transparent recruitment of public servants;
and
(g) individual performance.
(2) In determining whether an appointment, promotion or re-designation has
been undertaken in a fair and transparent manner, the overriding factors shall be
merit, fair competition and representation of the diversity of the county.
66. Advertisements of positions to be widely publicised
If a public office is to be filled, the County Public Service Board shall invite
applications through advertisement and other modes of communication so as to
reach as wide a population of potential applicants as possible and especially
persons who for any reason have been or may be disadvantaged.

-- 40 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
41 [Issue 1]
67. Appointments to be in writing
No appointment or assignment of a duty in a county public service shall be
valid unless it is evidenced in writing.
68. Board to maintain records of applicants
Subject to the relevant legislation, the County Public Service Board shall, for a
specified period, maintain a record of all applications received in response to
advertisements inviting applications and such record may be inspected by any
person.
69. Re-designation of officers
(1) In selecting public officers for re-designation, the criteria for appointment
as prescribed under this Part shall apply.
(2) A public officer shall not be re-designated to hold or act in a public office
if—
(a) the office is not vacant;
(b) the public officer does not meet all the qualifications, except for
experience at a lower grade in the relevant cadre, attached to the
public office;
(c) the decision to re-designate the officer may disadvantage any public
officer already serving in the relevant cadre; or
(d) the officer subject to re-designation has not consented to the re-
designation.
(3) If a public officer is re-designated, the officer shall not in any way suffer
reduction in remuneration.
70. Provisions on appointments to apply to promotions
(1) The provisions of this Act and regulations or procedures made under this
Act that apply to appointments shall also apply to promotions.
(2) If a public officer has been promoted, the head of department shall within
sixty days after the date of the promotion release the public officer to take up the
promotion and if the officer is not so released, he or she stands released upon
the lapse of sixty days.
(3) If a public officer has been promoted and has failed to take up the
promotion, the promotional decision shall lapse upon the expiry of sixty days
after the date of the decision and the officer shall revert back to the office held
prior to the decision, subject to confirmation that the person received the official
communication on the promotion and was released.
71. Confirmation of appointment on lapse of period
(1) If the relevant authority fails to confirm an appointment of a public officer
initially appointed on probationary terms, and the term has lapsed with or without
an extension, the officer shall stand confirmed in the appointment on the due
date.

-- 41 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 42
(2) The period served on probationary terms shall be taken into account
when computing the period of service for the purpose of payment of pension
benefits, gratuity or any other terminal benefit.
(3) A probationary period of service shall not be extended except on account
of—
(a) affording the public officer further opportunity to pass an
examination the passing of which is a condition for the confirmation,
the officer’s service otherwise being satisfactory;
(b) affording the public officer an opportunity for improvement in any
respect, in which the officer’s work or conduct have been adversely
reported on.
72. Power to deploy public officers
(1) The power to deploy a county public officer within a department shall vest
in the relevant county chief officer.
(2) The power to deploy a county public officer from one department to
another shall vest in the head of the county public service.
73. Secondments
(1) The national government shall put in place measures to protect its public
officers on secondment to the counties from loss or disadvantage with respect to
pension benefits, gratuity or other terminal benefits.
(2) Unless there is an agreement to the contrary, it shall be the responsibility
of the national government to pay the salaries, remuneration, allowances and
other benefits due to the staff seconded to a county government during the
transition period.
(3) If for any reason it is not necessary for an officer on secondment to
remain seconded and the secondment period has not lapsed, the officer shall be
entitled to revert back to the public office held before secondment.
(4) The County Public Service Board shall not allow a public officer to
proceed on secondment if it is not in the interest of the public officer or the
concerned county public service.
(5) The County Public Service Board making a decision on secondment shall
not allow the secondment unless it has considered the representation by the
concerned authorized officer or head of department.
74. County Public Service Board to regulate appointment of persons on
contract
The County Public Service Board shall regulate the engagement of persons
on contract, volunteer and casual workers, staff of joint ventures and attachment
of interns in its public bodies and offices.
75. Action on irregularity of process
If it comes to the attention of the County Public Service Board that there is
reason to believe that any process or decision under this Part may have occurred

-- 42 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
43 [Issue 1]
in an irregular or fraudulent manner, the County Public Service Board shall
investigate the matter and, if satisfied that the irregularity or fraud has occurred,
the County Public Service Board may—
(a) revoke the decision;
(b) direct the concerned head of department or lawful authority to
commence the process afresh; or
(c) take any corrective action including disciplinary action.
76. Prohibition of punishment contrary to the Constitution
(1) In exercising its disciplinary powers, the County Public Service Board
shall observe the principles of natural justice.
(2) No public officer may be punished in a manner contrary to any provision
of the Constitution or any Act of Parliament.
(3) Nothing in this section shall limit the powers conferred on the county
government or any other lawful authority discharging a disciplinary function from
retiring an officer from the county public service on the ground of public interest.
(4) In this section, retirement on the ground of public interest may be imposed
instead of any other punishment if the decision maker considers that although the
misconduct has been proven—
(a) the officer has nevertheless raised a mitigation factor that renders
imposition of a punishment too harsh in view of the circumstances of
the case; or
(b) the length of service benefits accrued and previous good record of
the officer justifies the retirement; or
(c) imposing a punishment against the officer is likely to adversely
affect the reputation of the public body concerned or the county
public service generally.
(5) If criminal proceedings are instituted against a county public officer,
disciplinary proceedings against the officer for dismissal or imposition of any
other punishment on any grounds involved in the criminal charge shall not be
taken until the conclusion of the criminal proceedings and the determination of
any appeal therefrom has been made.
(6) Nothing in subsection (5) shall be interpreted as prohibiting or restricting
the power of the county government or the concerned county chief officer or
other lawful authority to interdict or suspend or take any interlocutory decision
against the public officer.
77. Appeals to the Public Service Commission
(1) Any person dissatisfied or affected by a decision made by the County
Public Service Board or a person in exercise or purported exercise of disciplinary
control against any county public officer may appeal to the Public Service
Commission (in this Part referred to as the “Commission”) against the decision.
(2) The Commission shall entertain appeals on any decision relating to
employment of a person in a county government including a decision in respect
of—
(a) recruitment, selection, appointment and qualifications attached to
any office;

-- 43 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 44
(b) remuneration and terms and conditions of service;
(c) disciplinary control;
(d) national values and principles of governance, under Article 10, and
values and principles of public service under Article 232 of the
Constitution;
(e) retirement and other removal from service;
(f) pension benefits, gratuity and any other terminal benefits; or
(g) any other decision the Commission considers to fall within its
constitutional competence to hear and determine on appeal in that
regard.
(3) An appeal under subsection (1) shall be in writing and made within ninety
days after the date of the decision, but the Commission may entertain an appeal
later if, in the opinion of the Commission, the circumstances warrant it.
(4) The Commission shall not entertain an appeal more than once in respect
to the same decision.
(5) Any person dissatisfied or affected by a decision made by the
Commission on appeal in a decision made in a disciplinary case may apply for
review and the Commission may admit the application if—
(a) the Commission is satisfied that there appear in the application new
and material facts which might have affected its earlier decision, and
if adequate reasons for the non-disclosure of such facts at an earlier
date are given; or
(b) there is an error apparent on record of either decision.
(6) An application for review under subsection (5) shall be in writing and
made within the time prescribed by the Commission in regulations governing
disciplinary proceedings, but the commission may entertain an application for
review later if, in the opinion of the Commission, the circumstances warrant it.
78. Resignation, retirement, etc.
(1) A county public officer desirous of resigning from office may do so in
writing addressed to the lawful appointing authority for the public office.
(2) The resignation letter shall be delivered to the lawful appointing authority
by hand or by registered mail.
(3) Resignation under this section shall take effect thirty days after the date of
the resignation letter.
(4) A person who has resigned from the county public service may rejoin the
service in accordance with the provision governing the relevant appointment.
79. Grounds for retirement
A person may retire from the county public service—
(a) on attainment of the mandatory retirement age prescribed under the
relevant legislation or policy or as agreed upon between the county
public officer and relevant appointing authority;
(b) on grounds of ill health subject to section 81;

-- 44 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
45 [Issue 1]
(c) on abolition of the county public office;
(d) in the public interest; or
(e) under a special retirement scheme agreed between a public officer
or the representative of the public officer and the relevant appointing
authority.
80. Prescription of retirement on age
The mandatory retirement age for a county public officer generally or for any
category of public officers, shall be prescribed by policy of the national
government.
81. Retirement on the ground of ill health
(1) A county public officer may retire from the county public office on the
ground of ill health if—
(a) the concerned county chief officer considers that the public officer is
incapable, by reason of any infirmity of body or mind, of discharging
the functions of the public office and it is in the best interest for the
officer to retire; or
(b) the public officer requests to be retired on the ground of ill health, in
which case, the county chief officer shall initiate the process for the
retirement in accordance with this section.
(2) If a public officer is considered for retirement or has requested to be
retired in accordance with subsection (1), the concerned county chief officer shall
require the officer to be examined by a medical board constituted by the director
of medical services in the national government with the view to ascertain whether
or not the public officer should be retired on the ground of ill health.
(3) After the public officer has been examined in accordance with subsection
(2) and the finding is that he or she should be retired, the director of medical
services shall forward the medical board’s records of proceedings and findings to
the county head of public service who shall—
(a) request the officer to make any representation in view of the medical
board’s record of proceeding and findings;
(b) make recommendations in view of the medical board’s findings and
the officer’s representation, if any; and
(c) forward all the documents referred to in the subsection to the
County Public Service Board.
(4) Unless the County Public Service Board considers that further inquiry is
necessary, in which case it shall issue directions to the authorized officer
accordingly, the Board shall decide forthwith whether the public officer should be
called upon to retire on the ground of ill health.
(5) If the circumstances of ill health are such that a public officer cannot
attend medical board or make a presentation on the findings of the medical board
as provided for under this section, the public officer may nevertheless be retired
by the County Public Service Board, if the authorized officer submits the case to
it, on the ground of ill health in accordance with the law or service regulation or
prescribed terms of service dealing with the period an officer may be retained in
the service in case of prolonged ill health.

-- 45 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 46
82. Retirement on grounds of abolition of office
(1) If more than one county public officers, holding similar public offices are to
be retired on the ground of abolition of office but one or more public officers is to
remain in office, the concerned county chief officer shall inform the public officers
that their retirement is under consideration and shall invite each of them to make
representation within reasonable time.
(2) Upon receipt of the representations in subsection (1) or upon failure to
receive any representation within the prescribed time, the county chief officer
shall forward the case to the County Public Service Board including a
recommendation justifying the retirement of the officer together with the officer’s
representation if any.
(3) Unless the County Public Service Board considers that further justification
is necessary, in which case it shall issue directions to the county chief officer
accordingly, it shall decide whether the public officer should be retired on the
ground of abolition of office.
(4) The County Public Service Board shall not retire any public officer on the
ground of abolition of office unless there is written evidence that the public office
concerned has been abolished.
83. Retirement on grounds of public interest
(1) If a county chief officer, after having considered the report of the
complaint against a public officer and it is apparent that it is desirable to retire the
officer on the ground of public interest, the county chief officer shall—
(a) serve the public officer a notice setting out the particulars of the
complaint as reported and asking the officer to make representation
within a reasonable time; and
(b) upon receipt of the representation or if none is received within the
prescribed time, forward to the County Public Service Board all the
details of the case.
(2) Unless the County Public Service Board considers that further inquiry into
the complaint is necessary, in which case it shall issue direction to the county
chief officer accordingly, it shall decide forthwith whether the public officer should
be retired on the ground of public interest.
(3) For a complaint or report to justify retirement on the ground of public
interest, it shall be established that the public officer, offended public policy
protected in prescribed government policy, Act of Parliament or binding decision
made by a competent court of law.
84. Retirement pursuant to agreement or special retirement scheme
(1) The County Public Service Board may retire a public officer if—
(a) the officer’s contractual terms and conditions of service provide for a
special retirement clause and has fallen due; or
(b) the officer is required or is willing to voluntarily retire in accordance
with the terms and conditions prescribed in a special retirement
scheme.

-- 46 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
47 [Issue 1]
(2) Except in cases of voluntary retirement or retirement in accordance with
contractual terms and conditions, a public officer shall not be retired under this
section unless the County Public Service Board or other lawful authority has
accorded the officer a reasonable opportunity to make representations on the
intended retirement.
85. Entitlement to apply for review
A public officer retired under this Act shall be entitled to apply for a review
against the decision on account of—
(a) fresh material facts which, with due diligence, could not be
presented when the decision was initially made;
(b) an error apparent on the record of the initial decision; or
(c) manifest absence of parity of treatment in view of the circumstances
and facts of the case.
86. Delegation by County Public Service Board
(1) The County Public Service Board may delegate, in writing, any of its
functions to any one or more of its members and the county secretary, county
chief officer, sub-county or Ward administrator, village administrator, city or
municipal manager and town administrators.
(2) The provisions of this Part shall apply to the person to whom the powers
are delegated under this section.
PART VIII – CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
87. Principles of citizen participation in counties
Citizen participation in county governments shall be based upon the following
principles—
(a) timely access to information, data, documents, and other information
relevant or related to policy formulation and implementation;
(b) reasonable access to the process of formulating and implementing
policies, laws, and regulations, including the approval of
development proposals, projects and budgets, the granting of
permits and the establishment of specific performance standards;
(c) protection and promotion of the interest and rights of minorities,
marginalized groups and communities and their access to relevant
information;
(d) legal standing to interested or affected persons, organizations, and
where pertinent, communities, to appeal from or, review decisions,
or redress grievances, with particular emphasis on persons and
traditionally marginalized communities, including women, the youth,
and disadvantaged communities;
(e) reasonable balance in the roles and obligations of county
governments and non-state actors in decision-making processes to
promote shared responsibility and partnership, and to provide
complementary authority and oversight;

-- 47 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 48
(f) promotion of public-private partnerships, such as joint committees,
technical teams, and citizen commissions, to encourage direct
dialogue and concerted action on sustainable development; and
(g) recognition and promotion of the reciprocal roles of non-state actors’
participation and governmental facilitation and oversight.
88. Citizens right to petition and challenge
(1) Citizens have a right to petition the county government on any matter
under the responsibility of the county government.
(2) Citizen petitions shall be made in writing to the county government.
(3) County legislation shall give further effect to section 88(1).
89. Duty to respond to citizens’ petitions or challenges
County government authorities, agencies and agents have a duty to respond
expeditiously to petitions and challenges from citizens.
90. Matters subject to local referenda
(1) A county government may conduct a local referendum on among other
local issues—
(a) county laws and petitions; or
(b) planning and investment decisions affecting the county for which a
petition has been raised and duly signed by at least twenty five
percent of the registered voters where the referendum is to take
place.
(2) The Elections Act (No. 24 of 2011) shall apply, with necessary
modifications, with regard to a referendum referred to under subsection (1).
91. Establishment of modalities and platforms for citizen participation
The county government shall facilitate the establishment of structures for
citizen participation including—
(a) information communication technology based platforms;
(b) town hall meetings;
(c) budget preparation and validation fora;
(d) notice boards: announcing jobs, appointments, procurement,
awards and other important announcements of public interest;
(e) development project sites;
(f) avenues for the participation of peoples’ representatives including
but not limited to members of the National Assembly and Senate; or
(g) establishment of citizen fora at county and decentralized units.
92. Part to apply to decentralized units
(1) The provisions of this Part shall apply with necessary modifications to all
decentralized units of the county.

-- 48 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
49 [Issue 1]
(2) The governor shall submit an annual report to the county assembly on
citizen participation in the affairs of the county government.
(3) Regulations made under section 135 of this Act and County legislation
may give full effect to this Part.
PART IX – PUBLIC COMMUNICATION AND ACCESS TO INFORMATION
93. Principles of public communication
Public communication and access to information shall be based on the
following principles—
(a) integration of communication in all development activities;
(b) observation of access to information by county media in accordance
with Article 35 of the Constitution; and
(c) observation of media ethics, standards and professionalism.
94. Objectives of county communication
A County government shall use the media to—
(a) create awareness on devolution and governance;
(b) promote citizens understanding for purposes of peace and national
cohesion;
(c) undertake advocacy on core development issues such as
agriculture, education, health, security, economics, sustainable
environment among others; and
(d) promotion of the freedom of the media.
95. County communication framework
(1) A County government shall establish mechanisms to facilitate public
communication and access to information in the form of media with the widest
public outreach in the county, which may include—
(a) television stations;
(b) information communication technology centres;
(c) websites;
(d) community radio stations;
(e) public meetings; and
(f) traditional media.
(2) The county government shall encourage and facilitate other means of
mass communication including traditional media.
96. Access to information
(1) Every Kenyan citizen shall on request have access to information held by
any county government or any unit or department thereof or any other State
organ in accordance with Article 35 of the Constitution.
(2) Every county government and its agencies shall designate an office for
purposes of ensuring access to information as required by subsection (1).

-- 49 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 50
(3) Subject to national legislation governing access to information, a county
government shall enact legislation to ensure access to information.
(4) A county legislation enacted pursuant to subsection (3), may impose
reasonable fees or charges for accessing information held by the county
government, its departments or agencies.
97. Inclusion and integration of minorities and marginalized groups
A county government, public and private organisation and private individual,
shall observe the following principles—
(a) protection of marginalized and minority groups from discrimination
and from treatment of distinction of any kind, including language,
religion, culture, national or social origin, sex, caste, birth, descent
or other status;
(b) non-discrimination and equality of treatment in all areas of
economic, educational, social, religious, political and cultural life of
the marginalized and minority groups;
(c) special protection to vulnerable persons who may be subject to
threats or acts of discrimination, hostility, violence and abuse as a
result of their ethnic, cultural, linguistic, religious or other identity;
(d) special measures of affirmative action for marginalized and minority
groups to ensure their enjoyment of equal rights with the rest of the
population;
(e) respect and promotion of the identity and characteristics of
minorities;
(f) promotion of diversity and intercultural education; and
(g) promotion of effective participation of marginalised and minority
groups in public and political life.
PART X – CIVIC EDUCATION
98. Principles of civic education
(1) The principles of civic education are intended to promote—
(a) empowerment and enlightenment of citizens and government;
(b) continual and systemic engagement of citizens and government;
and
(c) values and principles of devolution in the Constitution.
(2) No other content may be disseminated under civic education other than
as provided for under section 100.
99. Purpose and objectives of civic education
(1) The purpose of civic education under this Act is to have an informed
citizenry that actively participates in governance affairs of the society on the
basis of enhanced knowledge, understanding and ownership of the Constitution.
(2) The objectives of civic education are—
(a) sustained citizens’ engagement in the implementation of the
Constitution;

-- 50 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
51 [Issue 1]
(b) improved understanding, appreciation and engagement in the
operationalization of the county system of government;
(c) institutionalizing a culture of constitutionalism;
(d) knowledge of Kenya’s transformed political system, context and
implications;
(e) enhanced knowledge and understanding of electoral system and
procedures;
(f) enhanced awareness and mainstreaming of the Bill of Rights and
National values;
(g) heightened demand by citizens for service delivery by institutions of
governance at the county level;
(h) ownership and knowledge on the principal economic, social and
political issues facing county administrations and their form,
structures and procedures; and
(i) appreciation for the diversity of Kenya’s communities as building
blocks for national cohesion and integration.
100. Design and implementation of civic education
(1) Subject to subsection (2), each county shall implement an appropriate
civic education programme and establish a civic education unit in this regard.
(2) For purposes of subsection (1), there shall be established a national
design and framework of civic education, to determine the contents of the
curriculum for civic education taking into account the provisions of Article 33 of
the Constitution.
(3) The national and county governments shall facilitate the implementation
of civic education programme under subsection (2).
(4) The design and implementation of county civic education programmes
under this section shall involve the participation of registered non-state actors as
may by regulations be prescribed.
101. Institutional framework for civic education
Subject to section 100, County legislation shall provide the requisite
institutional framework for purposes of facilitating and implementing civic
education programmes under this Part.
PART XI – COUNTY PLANNING
102. Principles of planning and development facilitation
The principles of planning and development facilitation in a county shall—
(a) integrate national values in all processes and concepts;
(b) protect the right to self-fulfilment within the county communities and
with responsibility to future generations;
(c) protect and integrate rights and interest of minorities and
marginalized groups and communities;

-- 51 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 52
(d) protect and develop natural resources in a manner that aligns
national and county governments policies;
(e) align county financial and institutional resources to agreed policy
objectives and programmes;
(f) engender effective resource mobilization for sustainable
development;
(g) promote the pursuit of equity in resource allocation within the
county;
(h) provide a platform for unifying planning, budgeting, financing,
programme implementation and performance review; and
(i) serve as a basis for engagement between county government and
the citizenry, other stakeholders and interest groups.
103. Objectives of county planning
The objectives of county planning shall be to—
(a) ensure harmony between national, county and sub-county spatial
planning requirements;
(b) facilitate the development of a well-balanced system of settlements
and ensure productive use of scarce land, water and other
resources for economic, social, ecological and other functions
across a county;
(c) maintain a viable system of green and open spaces for a functioning
eco-system;
(d) harmonize the development of county communication system,
infrastructure and related services;
(e) develop urban and rural areas as integrated areas of economic and
social activity;
(f) provide the preconditions for integrating under-developed and
marginalized areas to bring them to the level generally enjoyed by
the rest of the county;
(g) protect the historical and cultural heritage, artefacts and sites within
the county; and
(h) make reservations for public security and other critical national
infrastructure and other utilities and services;
(i) work towards the achievement and maintenance of a tree cover of
at least ten per cent of the land area of Kenya as provided in Article
69 of the Constitution; and
(j) develop the human resource capacity of the county.
104. Obligation to plan by the county
(1) A county government shall plan for the county and no public funds shall
be appropriated outside a planning framework developed by the county executive
committee and approved by the county assembly.
(2) The county planning framework shall integrate economic, physical, social,
environmental and spatial planning.

-- 52 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
53 [Issue 1]
(3) The county government shall designate county departments, cities and
urban areas, sub-counties and Wards as planning authorities of the county.
(4) To promote public participation, non-state actors shall be incorporated in
the planning processes by all authorities.
(5) County plans shall be binding on all sub-county units for developmental
activities within a County.
105. Planning in the county
(1) A county planning unit shall be responsible for—
(a) coordinating integrated development planning within the county;
(b) ensuring integrated planning within the county;
(c) ensuring linkages between county plans and the national planning
framework; and
(d) ensuring meaningful engagement of citizens in the planning
process;
(e) ensuring the collection, collation, storage and updating of data and
information suitable for the planning process; and
(f) ensuring the establishment of a GIS based database system.
(2) The designated planning authority in the county shall appropriately
organise for the effective implementation of the planning function within the
county.
106. Integrating national and county planning
(1) Cooperation in planning shall be undertaken in the context of the law
governing inter-governmental relations.
(2) County plans shall be based on the functions of the county governments
as specified in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution and on relevant national
policies.
(3) County plans shall take due cognisance of the financial viability of
development programmes.
(4) County planning shall provide for citizen participation.
107. Types and purposes of county plans
(1) To guide, harmonize and facilitate development within each county there
shall be the following plans—
(a) county integrated development plan;
(b) county sectoral plans;
(c) county spatial plan; and
(d) cities and urban areas plans as provided for under the Urban Areas
and Cities Act (No. 13 of 2011).
(2) The County plans shall be the basis for all budgeting and spending in a
county.

-- 53 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 54
108. County integrated development plan
(1) There shall be a five year county integrated development plan for each
county which shall have—
(a) clear goals and objectives;
(b) an implementation plan with clear outcomes;
(c) provisions for monitoring and evaluation; and
(d) clear reporting mechanisms.
(2) Each county integrated development plan shall at least identify—
(a) the institutional framework, which shall include an organization
chart, required for—
(i) the implementation of the integrated development plan; and
(ii) addressing the county’s internal transformation needs;
(b) as informed by the strategies and programmes set out in the plan—
(i) any investment initiatives in the county;
(ii) any development initiatives in the county, including
infrastructure, physical, social, economic and institutional
development;
(iii) all known projects, plans and programs to be implemented
within the county by any organ of state; and
(iv) the key performance indicators set by the county.
(3) An integrated development plan shall—
(a) have attached to it maps, statistics and other appropriate
documents; or
(b) refer to maps, statistics and other appropriate documents that are
not attached but held in a GIS based database system:
Provided that the plans under paragraphs (a) and (b) are open for public
inspection at the offices of the county in question.
(4) A resource mobilization and management framework shall be reflected in
a county’s integrated development plan and shall at least—
(a) include the budget projection required under the law governing
county government financial management;
(b) indicate the financial resources that are available for capital project
developments and operational expenditure; and
(c) include a financial strategy that defines sound financial management
and expenditure control: as well as ways and means of increasing
revenues and external funding for the county and its development
priorities and objectives, which strategy may address the following—
(i) revenue raising strategies;
(ii) asset management strategies;
(iii) financial management strategies;
(v) capital financing strategies;

-- 54 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
55 [Issue 1]
(vi) operational financing strategies; and
(vii) strategies that would enhance cost-effectiveness.
109. County sectoral plans
(1) A County department shall develop a ten year county sectoral plan as
component parts of the county integrated development plan.
(2) The County sectoral plans shall be—
(a) programme based;
(b) the basis for budgeting and performance management; and
(c) reviewed every five years by the county executive and approved by
the county assembly, but updated annually.
110. County spatial plans
(1) There shall be a ten year county GIS based database system spatial plan
for each county, which shall be a component part of the county integrated
development plan providing—
(a) a spatial depiction of the social and economic development
programme of the county as articulated in the integrated county
development plan;
(b) clear statements of how the spatial plan is linked to the regional,
national and other county plans; and
(c) clear clarifications on the anticipated sustainable development
outcomes of the spatial plan.
(2) The spatial plan, which shall be spatial development framework for the
county, shall—
(a) give effect to the principles and objects contained in sections 102
and 103;
(b) set out objectives that reflect the desired spatial form of the county
taking into account the development programme of the county as
articulated in its county integrated development plan;
(c) contain strategies and policies regarding the manner in which the
objectives referred to in paragraph (b), which strategies and policies
shall—
(i) indicate desired patterns of land use within the county;
(ii) address the spatial construction or reconstruction of the
county;
(iii) provide strategic guidance in respect of the location and
nature of development within the county;
(iv) set out basic guidelines for a land use management system in
the county taking into account any guidelines, regulations or
laws as provided for under Article 67(2)(h) of the Constitution;
(v) set out a capital investment framework for the county’s
development programs;
(vi) contain a strategic assessment of the environmental impact of
the spatial development framework;

-- 55 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 56
(vii) identify programs and projects for the development of land
within the county; and
(viii) be aligned with the spatial frameworks reflected in
development the integrated development plans of
neighbouring counties;
(d) shall indicate where public and private land development and
infrastructure investment should take place;
(e) shall indicate desired or undesired utilization of space in a particular
area;
(f) may delineate the urban edges of the municipalities within its
jurisdiction and mechanisms of dealing with the rural urban
interfaces;
(g) shall identify areas where strategic intervention is required;
(h) shall indicate areas where priority spending is required;
(i) clear clarifications on the anticipated sustainable development
outcomes of the spatial plan; and
(j) shall indicate the areas designated to conservation and recreation.
(3) Each county spatial plan shall be developed by the county executive
committee and approved by the respective county assemblies in accordance with
procedures approved by the respective county assembly.
(4) Each county spatial plan shall be reviewed every five years and the
revisions approved by the respective county assemblies.
111. City or municipal plans
(1) For each city and municipality there shall be the following plans—
(a) City or municipal land use plans;
(b) City or municipal building and zoning plans;
(c) City or urban area building and zoning plans;
(d) location of recreational areas and public facilities.
(2) A city or municipal plans shall be the instrument for development
facilitation and development control within the respective city or municipality.
(3) A city or municipal plan shall, within a particular city or municipality,
provide for—
(a) functions and principles of land use and building plans;
(b) location of various types of infrastructure within the city or
municipality;
(c) development control in the city or municipality within the national
housing and building code framework.
(4) City or municipal land use and building plans shall be binding on all public
entities and private citizens operating within the particular city or municipality.
(5) City or municipal land use and building plans shall be the regulatory
instruments for guiding and facilitating development within the particular city or
municipality.

-- 56 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
57 [Issue 1]
(6) Each city or municipal land use and building plan shall be reviewed every
five years and the revisions approved by the respective county assemblies.
112. Amending county integrated development plans
(1) A county executive committee may by a resolution, introduce a proposal
to amend the county’s integrated development plan.
(2) A proposed amendment under subsection (1) to a county’s integrated
development plan shall be considered and approved or rejected by the county
assembly in accordance with its standing orders.
(3) A proposal for amending a county’s integrated development plan shall
be—
(a) accompanied by a memorandum setting out the reasons for the
proposal; and
(b) aligned with the framework adopted in terms of section 106.
(4) If the amendment impacts on neighbouring counties, the county making
the amendment to its integrated development plan shall—
(a) consult all the county governments affected by the proposed
amendment; and
(b) take all comments submitted to it under paragraph (a) into account
before it reaches a final decision on the proposed amendment.
(5) A county that considers an amendment to its integrated development plan
shall—
(a) consult the cities and urban areas within the county on the proposed
amendment; and
(b) take all comments submitted to it by the cities and municipalities into
account before it takes a final decision on the proposed amendment.
(6) No amendment to a county’s integrated development plan may be
considered by the county assembly unless—
(a) all the members of the county assembly have been given
reasonable notice; and
(b) the proposed amendment has been published for public comment
for a period of at least twenty one days in a manner that allows the
public an opportunity to make representations with regard to the
proposed amendment.
(7) Subject to this section, nothing may be construed as precluding a person
ordinarily resident in a county from proposing an amendment to the county
integrated development plan.
113. Giving effect to the county integrated development plan
(1) A county’s integrated development plan shall—
(a) inform the county’s budget which shall be based on the annual
development priorities and objectives referred to in section 103 of
this Act and the performance targets set by the county; and

-- 57 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 58
(b) be used to prepare action plans for the implementation of strategies
identified by the county.
(2) Each county integrated development plan shall provide clear input, output
and outcome performance indicators, including—
(a) the percentage of households with access to basic services
contemplated under Article 43 of the Bill of Rights of the
Constitution;
(b) the percentage of a county’s capital budget actually spent on capital
projects identified for a particular financial year in terms of the
county’s integrated development plan;
(c) the number of jobs created through any local economic
development initiatives including capital projects; and
(d) financial viability of the integrated development plan in accordance
with nationally applicable ratios.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2), the performance
management system shall conform to nationally applicable guidelines on the
matter.
114. Planning for nationally significant projects in a county
(1) Development of nationally significant development projects within
counties shall be preceded by mandatory public hearings in each of the affected
counties.
(2) Projects under subsection (1) shall, subsequent to the mandatory public
hearings, be considered and approved or rejected by the county assembly.
115. Public participation in county planning
(1) Public participation in the county planning processes shall be mandatory
and be facilitated through—
(a) mechanisms provided for in Part VIII of this Act; and
(b) provision to the public of clear and unambiguous information on any
matter under consideration in the planning process, including—
(i) clear strategic environmental assessments;
(ii) clear environmental impact assessment reports;
(iii) expected development outcomes; and
(iv) development options and their cost implications.
(2) Each county assembly shall develop laws and regulations giving effect to
the requirement for effective citizen participation in development planning and
performance management within the county and such laws and guidelines shall
adhere to minimum national requirements.
PART XII – DELIVERY OF COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICES
116. Principles of public services delivery in the county
(1) A county government and its agencies shall have an obligation to deliver
services within its designated area of jurisdiction.

-- 58 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
59 [Issue 1]
(2) A county shall deliver services while observing the principles of equity,
efficiency, accessibility, non-discrimination, transparency, accountability, sharing
of data and information, and subsidiarity.
117. Standards and norms for public service delivery
(1) A county government and its agencies shall in delivering public services—
(a) give priority to the basic needs of the public;
(b) promote the development of the public service delivery institutions
and,
ensure that all members of the public have access to basic services.
(2) Public services shall be equitably delivered in a manner that accords to—
(a) prudent, economic, efficient, effective and sustainable use of
available resources;
(b) continual improvement of standards and quality;
(c) appropriate incorporation of the use of information technology; and
(d) financial and environmental sustainability.
(3) A county government shall carry out regular review of the delivery of
services with a view to improvement.
118. Shared services
(1) A county government may enter into an agreement with the national
government, another county or an agency of the national government, to provide
or receive any service that each county participating in the agreement is
empowered to provide or receive within its own jurisdiction, including services
incidental to the primary purpose of any of the participating counties.
(2) Each county shall have a county shared services platform aligned to
national policies, standards and norms.
119. Citizen’s Service Centre
(1) A county executive committee shall establish a Citizens’ Service Centre
at—
(a) the county;
(b) the sub-county;
(c) the Ward; and
(d) any other decentralized level.
(2) A Citizens’ Service Centre shall serve as the central office for the
provision by the county executive committee in conjunction with the national
government of public services to the county citizens.
(3) The governor shall ensure the use of appropriate information and
communication technologies at a Citizens’ Service Centre to aid in the provision
of timely and efficient services to the county citizens.

-- 59 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 60
120. Tariffs and pricing of public services
(1) A county government or any agency delivering services in the county shall
adopt and implement a tariffs and pricing policy for the provision of public
services.
(2) A county government or agency delivering services through service
delivery agreements, shall comply with the provisions of this section.
(3) A tariff policy adopted under subsection (1) shall reflect the following
guidelines—
(a) users of county services should be treated equitably in the
application of tariffs, fees, levies or charges;
(b) the amount individual users pay for services should generally be in
proportion to their use of that service;
(c) poor households shall have access to at least basic services
through—
(i) tariffs that cover only operating and maintenance costs;
(ii) special tariffs or life line tariffs for low levels of use or
consumption of services or for basic levels of service; or
(iii) any other direct or indirect method of subsidies of tariffs for
poor households;
(d) tariffs shall reflect the costs reasonably associated with rendering
the service, including capital, operating, maintenance, administration
and replacement costs, and interest charges;
(e) tariffs shall be set at levels that facilitate the financial sustainability
of the service, taking into account subsidy from sources other than
the service concerned;
(f) provision may be made in appropriate circumstances for a
surcharge on the tariff for a service;
(g) provision may be made for the promotion of local economic
development through special tariffs for categories of commercial and
industrial users;
(h) promotion of the economic, efficient, effective and sustainable use
of resources, the recycling of waste and other appropriate
environmental objectives; and
(i) full disclosure of the subsidies on tariffs for poor households and
other categories of users.
(4) A tariff policy may differentiate between different categories of users,
debtors, service providers, services, service standards, geographical areas and
other matters as long as the differentiation does not amount to unfair
discrimination.
(5) A county government may make laws and regulations to give effect to the
implementation and enforcement of tariff policies.
121. Support to county governments
(1) The ministry or government department responsible for matters relating to
intergovernmental relations shall provide support to county governments to
enable them to perform their functions.

-- 60 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
61 [Issue 1]
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), the ministry or
government department shall—
(a) on its own initiative or on request by a county government or group
of persons, assess the performance of a county government with a
view to determine its support requirements;
(b) make a report on the assessment made under paragraph (a) and
the capacity needs of the county governments;
(c) in consultation with the relevant county government, conduct
research or inquiries to determine the extent of its support
requirements;
(d) where necessary assess and value the requirements of the county
for the cabinet secretary to take the relevant measures towards
providing support;
(e) collect information on county performance and on best practices in
resolving performance problems;
(f) assist county governments to identify the causes of their
performance problems, and potential solutions to the problems;
(g) where circumstances indicate that the county is unable or has
difficulty in performing its functions, prepare clear and practical
measures and recovery plan to build the capacity of the county to
enable it to effectively perform its functions;
(h) in collaboration with the relevant county secretary consult with the
cabinet secretary for finance on any matter of support relating to
finance;
(i) consult with the relevant county assembly on the findings of the
report made under paragraph (a) and the recommendations under
paragraph (e) and jointly adopt an implementation plan; and
(j) with the approval of the secretary, obtain the services of any
financial expert to perform any specific work for the service.
(3) The report made under subsection (2) shall give full and clear details of
inability of the county to function and cover all aspects that hinder the county
from undertaking its functions.
(4) Where after receiving the report under subsection (1) the cabinet
secretary is of the view that it is necessary for the national government to
intervene and perform the relevant functions, the Cabinet Secretary shall seek
the approval of Parliament before assuming responsibility for the functions.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall give notice to the county government of the
nature of intervention, the measures to be taken and the period required to rectify
the problem.
PART XIII – PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION OF COUNTY
GOVERNMENT
122. Grounds for suspension arising from conflict or war
The President may suspend a county government—
(a) in an emergency arising out of internal conflict or war; or
(b) in any other exceptional circumstances.

-- 61 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 62
123. Suspension of county government in exceptional circumstances
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person may petition the President to suspend
a county government in accordance with Article 192(1)(b) of the Consitution if the
county government engages in actions that are deemed to be against the
common needs and interests of the citizens of a county.
(2) A petition under subsection (1) shall be supported by the signatures of not
less than ten percent of the registered voters in the county.
(3) The President shall, within fourteen days after receiving a petition against
a county government under subsection (1), submit a report on the averments
made and grounds giving rise to suspension of a county government before the
apex intergovermental body (hereinafter refered to as the apex body) established
under the law governing intergovernmental relations for approval.
(4) Upon approval by the apex body, the President shall nominate members
of a Commission to inquire into and investigate the situation in the county and
make recommendations on the suspension of the county government and shall,
after approval by Senate, appoint the members of the Commission by notice in
the Gazette.
(5) The Commission shall comprise—
(a) a chairperson, who shall be an advocate of the High Court of Kenya
with at least fifteen years’ experience;
(b) the chairperson of the National Police Service;
(c) two persons resident in the affected county and who have not for the
last ten years stood for an elective office in the affected county
government, or have been an officer or employee of the affected
county government; and
(d) two other persons not resident in the affected county with
experience in conflict management.
(6) The Commission shall have all or any of the powers vested in a
Commission under the Commissions of Inquiry Act (Cap. 102), and at any inquiry
directed under this section, the county government in question and any member
thereof shall be entitled to be heard.
(7) The Commission shall inquire into the matters before it expeditiously and
report on the facts and make recommendations to the President.
(8) Upon receipt of the report of the Commission and upon being satisfied
that justifiable grounds exist for suspension of a county government, the
President shall within seven days forward the report and the recommendations of
the Commission, together with the petition for suspension of the county
government to the speaker of the Senate.
(9) The speaker shall cause a motion for the suspension of the county
government to be laid before the Senate within seven days and approval by
Senate shall be by a resolution adopted in accordance with the provisions of
Articles 122 and 123 of the Constitution.

-- 62 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
63 [Issue 1]
(10) Upon approval by the Senate, the President shall, by notice in the
Gazette, suspend the county government for a period not exceeding ninety days,
or until the suspension is terminated earlier by the Senate in accordance with
Article 192(4) of the Constitution.
124. Prorogation of the county assembly
(1) During the period of suspension of a county government, the county
assembly shall stand prorogued.
(2) During a period of suspension, the speaker and members of the county
assembly shall remain in office and shall retain half their benefits.
(3) All Bills introduced before the county assembly and that have not received
assent prior to suspension shall expire and shall be re-introduced as new bills
upon the cessation of the suspension.
(4) County assembly committees shall be dissolved during the period of
suspension and shall be reconstituted upon the cessation of suspension.
(5) The prorogation of the county assembly shall come to an end—
(a) if the suspension is terminated by the Senate as provided in this Act;
(b) upon the expiry of ninety days; or
(c) upon the publication of a notice on the holding of the election of the
county assembly in the Kenya Gazette by the Independent Electoral
and Boundaries Commission according to the provisions of the
Elections Act, (No. 24 of 2011).
125. Suspension of the county executive committee
(1) During the period of suspension of a county government, the functions of
the county executive committee shall be suspended and its functions shall be
undertaken by an interim county management board.
(2) During a period of suspension, the governor, deputy governor and
members of the executive committee shall receive half of their benefits.
126. Establishment of the Interim County Management Board
(1) An Interim County Management Board for a suspended county
government shall be appointed by the President by notice in the Gazette.
(2) The Interim County Management Board shall comprise—
(a) a chairperson appointed by the President with the approval of the
Senate;
(b) not less than three, or more than five other members appointed by
the Cabinet Secretary responsible for intergovermental relations
with the approval of the Senate; and
(c) a certified public secretary of good professional standing appointed
by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for intergovermental relations
who shall be the secretary to the board.

-- 63 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 64
(3) A person shall qualify for appointment as a chairperson or a member of
the Board if the person—
(a) is a resident of the county in question;
(b) has knowledge, expertise and reasonable experience in
management of the security sector or management of the private or
public sector, and in addition a degree from a university recognised
in Kenya;
(c) has not for the last five years stood for elective office in the
suspended county government, or been an officer or employee of
the suspended county government; and
(d) has not, for the last five years, been a member of a governing body
of a political party.
(4) The Board may co-opt not more than three members with specialized
knowledge or expertise to assist in the discharge of specific functions of the
Board and on such terms as the Board may specify.
127. Functions of the Interim County Management Board
(1) The Interim County Management Board shall have all powers and
functions vested in the county executive committee under the Constitution and
under this Act for the performance of its functions and, in particular the power
to—
(a) assist the county government in setting up a programme for
complete restoration of protection of human rights, peace, security
and public order;
(b) work closely with the county administration in improving the general
governance and service delivery;
(c) summon any member, officer or employee of county government or
any other person to appear before the Board concerning matters
relevant to its functions;
(d) summon any member, officer or employee of county government or
any other person to produce any books or documents relating to the
functions of the Board;
(e) require the county government to provide additional information or to
explain any inconsistency, where the Board determines, based on
information it may have obtained;
(f) hear and receive evidence and examine witnesses; and
(g) issue instructions in writing to members, officers and employees of
the county government for the better implementation of its functions.
(2) Any person who without reasonable excuse—
(a) neglects or refuses to comply with the summons issued by the
Board;
(b) having appeared, refuses to be examined on oath or affirmation or
to take such oath or affirmation;

-- 64 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
65 [Issue 1]
(c) having taken such oath or affirmation, refuses to answer fully and
satisfactorily, to the best of his knowledge and belief, all questions
put to him; or
(d) knowingly and wilfully gives any evidence which is untrue in any
particular matter,
commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction, for every such neglect or
refusal, to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand shillings or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.
(3) The members of the Board shall be paid allowances to cater for their
expenses as such reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses as
shall be advised by the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for intergovernmental relations shall
provide such staff as may be necessary for purposes of the performance of the
functions of the Board.
(5) No member of the suspended county government shall exercise any
supervisory or oversight control over the functions of the Board or its activities.
(6) No matter or thing done by a member of the Board, or by any officer, or
agent of the Board shall, if the matter or thing is done in good faith for the due
execution of the functions, powers or duties of the Board under this Act, render
such member, officer, or agent personally liable to any legal action, claim,
demand or liability whatsoever.
(7) The Interim County Management Board shall within ninety days of
appointment prepare and submit to the President a report of its activities and its
recommendations.
128. Dissolution of the Interim County Management Board
The President by notice in the Gazette shall dissolve an Interim County
Management Board upon the new county government coming to office after
holding elections pursuant to Article 192(6) of the Constitution.
129. Termination of suspension
The suspension of a county government shall be terminated in the following
ways—
(a) in the circumstances described in Article 192(4) and (5); or
(b) upon termination by the Senate by a resolution adopted in
accordance with Articles 122 and 123 of the Constitution.
130. County elections after suspension
(1) Elections for a suspended county shall be held within ninety days after the
suspension.
(2) The Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission shall cause
elections of the governor and county assembly to be held in the affected county
according to the provisions of the Elections Act (No. 24 of 2011).

-- 65 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 66
PART XIV – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
131. Financial provision
(1) The funds and financial management of county governments shall be as
provided under the law relating to public finance.
(2) The procedure of budgeting, borrowing powers and grants management
shall be as provided in the law relating to public finance.
132. Pension schemes
Subject to the transitional provisions herein, all members, officers and staff of
a county government shall subscribe to an existing pension scheme for officers
and staff of local government.
133. Protection against personal liability
(1) No act, matter or thing done or omitted to be done by—
(a) any member of the county government or its administration board or
committee;
(b) any member of the county assembly;
(c) any member of staff or other person in the service of the county
government; or
(d) any person acting under the direction of the county government,
shall, if that act, matter or thing was done or omitted in good faith in the execution
of a duty or under direction, render that member or person personally liable to
any civil liability.
(2) A person who is not exempted from liability under subsection (1) and who
directs or concurs in the use of funds contrary to existing legal rules or
instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be
required to make good the loss even if that person has ceased to hold office.
134. Repeal of Cap. 265
(1) The Local Government Act is repealed upon the final announcement of all
the results of the first elections held under the Constitution.
(2) All issues that may arise as a consequence of the repeal under
subsection (1) shall be dealt with and discharged by the body responsible for
matters relating to transition.
135. Regulations
(1) The Cabinet Secretary may make regulations for the better carrying out of
the purposes and provisions of this Act and such Regulations may be made in
respect of all county governments and further units of decentralization generally
or for any class of county governments and further units of decentralization.
(2) Regulations made under this section shall be tabled before the Senate for
approval, and shall not take effect until such approval is obtained.

-- 66 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
67 [Issue 1]
PART XV – TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
136. First sitting of the county assembly
(1) The first sitting of a county assembly after the first election under the
Constitution, shall take place at a time, place and date determined by the
Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission, which date shall not be later
than fourteen days after the results of the elections have been gazetted.
(2) The Chief Justice shall designate for each county a judge to swear in the
members and the speaker elected at the meeting under subsection (1).
137. Facilitation of civic education
(1) In the period preceding establishment of county governments under
Article 176 of the Constitution, the design, coordination and implementation of
civic education shall be facilitated by the Ministries responsible for matters
relating to civic education, devolution and county governments and such other
programmes.
(2) For the purposes of this section and for the avoidance of doubt—
(a) the Ministries responsible for matters of civic education, devolution
and county governments respectively shall be responsible for the
design and coordination of overall civic education on devolution as
provided for in this Act; and
(b) the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution shall
ensure that the content of civic education curriculum and materials
developed pursuant thereto, reflect the letter and spirit of Chapter
Eleven of the Constitution.
(3) The Ministries specified under subsection (2) shall, create capacity and
facilitate the county governments to effectively assume their responsibilities in
the delivery of civic education in the county.
138. Arrangements for public servants
(1) Any public officer appointed by the Public Service Commission in exercise
of its constitutional powers and functions before the coming to effect of this Act
and is serving in a county on the date of the constitution of that county
government shall be deemed to be in the service of the county government on
secondment from national government with their terms of service as at that date
and—
(a) the officer’s terms of service including remuneration, allowances and
pension or other benefits shall not be altered to the officer’s
disadvantage; and
(b) the officer shall not be removed from the service except in
accordance with the terms and conditions applicable to the officer as
at the date immediately before the establishment of the county
government or in accordance with the law applicable to the officer at
the time of commencement of the proceedings for the removal; and
(c) the officer’s terms and conditions of service may be altered to
office’s advantage.
(2) Every public officer holding or acting in a public office to which the
Commission had appointed the officer as at the date of the establishment of the

-- 67 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 68
county government shall discharge those duties in relation to the relevant
functions of the county government or national government, as the case may be.
(3) The body responsible for the transition to county governments shall in
consultation with the Public Service Commission and relevant ministries facilitate
the redeployment, transfers and secondment of staff to the national and county
governments.
(4) The provision under subsection (2) shall not preclude—
(a) the County Public Service Board or other lawful authority from
promoting or appointing the officer to another public office in the
county; or
(b) re-deployment by the relevant lawful authority.
(5) The period of secondment under subsection (1) shall cease upon the
transfer of a public officer from the national government to a county government
or upon the release of an officer by the county government to the national
government.
(6) Appointment of a public officer by the Commission includes appointment
of a public officer on powers delegated by the Commission.
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Sections 9(3), 12(2), 31(1), 33(1)) and 39.]
OATHS OF OFFICE
OATH OF OFFICE F OR GOVERNOR/D EPUTY G OVERNOR
I ..............., do swear/solemnly affirm that I shall always truly and diligently serve
the people and the Republic of Kenya in the office the governor/deputy governor
of ..........................county; that I shall diligently discharge my duties and perform
my functions in the said office, to the best of my judgment; (that (in the case of
the deputy governor) I shall at all times, when so required, faithfully and truly
give my counsel and advice to the Governor of the .......................... county); that
I shall do justice to all. (So help me God)
OATH OF OFFICE F OR SPEAKER /ACTING SPEAKER
I, ......................... , having been elected as speaker/acting speaker of the county
assembly of ......................... county do swear/solemnly affirm that I shall always
truly and diligently serve the people and the Republic of Kenya in the office
speaker /acting speaker of the county assembly in ................. county; that I shall
respect, uphold, preserve, protect and defend this Constitution of the Republic of
Kenya; and that I shall do right to all manner of persons in accordance with the
Constitution of Kenya and the laws and conventions of Parliament without fear
or favour, affection or ill health. (So help me God)

-- 68 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
69 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
OATH OF OFFICE F OR C OUNTY ASSEMBLY C LERK
I ........................ , do swear/solemnly affirm that I shall always truly and diligently
serve the people and the Republic of Kenya in the office of the clerk of the
county assembly in ............................. county; that I shall diligently discharge my
duties and perform my functions in the said office, to the best of my judgment;
that I shall at all times, when so required, faithfully and truly give my counsel and
advice to the Speaker of the county assembly of ............................. county; that I
shall do justice to all. (So help me God)
OATH OF OFFICE F OR C OUNTY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEMBER
I ........................ , do swear/solemnly affirm that I shall always truly and diligently
serve the people and the Republic of Kenya in the office the executive
committee member of .............................. county; that I shall diligently discharge
my duties and perform my functions in the said office, to the best of my
judgment; that I shall at all times, when so required, faithfully and truly give my
counsel and advice to the governor of the ............................... county; that I shall
do justice to all. (So help me God)
OATH OF OFFICE F OR C OUNTY ASSEMBLY M EMBERS
I ........................ , do swear/solemnly affirm that I shall always truly and diligently
serve the people and the Republic of Kenya in the office of county assembly
committee member of ......................... county; that I shall diligently discharge my
duties and perform my functions in the said office, to the best of my judgment;
that I shall at all times, respect, uphold, preserve, protect and defend this
Constitution of the Republic of Kenya; and that I shall do right to all manner of
persons in accordance with the Constitution of Kenya and the laws and
conventions of Parliament, that I shall do justice to all. (So help me God)

-- 69 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 70
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Section 14(8).]
MATTERS TO BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY STANDING
ORDERS
GENERAL
SUBJECT MATTER SPECIFIC MATTER TO BE ADDRESSED
Introductory Interpretation
Proceedings on assembly of a new Assembly
Swearing-in of members
Swearing - in of
members and
election of Speaker Election of the Speaker
Election of member
to deputize for
Speaker
Election of member to deputize the Speaker Chairperson
of Committees of the Whole Assembly Presiding in the
Assembly
Leader of the majority party	Leader of the
majority Opposition in the Assembly
Governor’s address to Assembly
Governor entering or leaving
Governor and
persons other than
a Member Chamber Address by Senator or persons other than the
Governor or member
Location of sittings of a new Assembly
Regular sessions of the Assembly
Special sittings of the Assembly
Hours of meeting
Adjournment of the Assembly
Sittings and
Adjournments of the
Assembly
Adjournment on definite matter of urgent national or
county importance
Quorum at commencement of the Assembly
Quorum during the proceeding of the Assembly
Quorum of the
Assembly
Quorum during voting or division
Order Paper to be prepared and circulated	Order of Business
Messages from the Governor or Senator Sequence of
proceedings
Statements Statement Hour
Approval of county
public appointments
Committal to committees

-- 70 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
71 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
GENERAL
SUBJECT MATTER SPECIFIC MATTER TO BE ADDRESSED
Notices of Motions
Amendment of Notice of Motion
Certain Motions not to be moved
Time for moving Motions
Motion withdrawn may be moved again
Motions which may be moved without notice
Manner of debating Motions, Amendments thereto and
deferment of putting a question
Amendments to be in writing
Amendments to be relevant to Motion
Question proposed after Motion made
Motion in possession of the Assembly
Question as amended put
Motions
When amendment proposed but not made
Definition of Special Motion
Procedure for removal of Governor
Procedure for removal of Deputy Governor
Special Motions
Procedure for removal of member of County Executive
Committee
Voting in the Assembly
Division claimed Technical failure, confusion or error
occurring
Roll call voting
In case of confusion or error
Decorum during division
Voting and
Divisions
Original vote
Proceedings to be in Kiswahili, English or Kenyan sign
language Members to address the Speaker
Two or more members rising to speak
Speeches may not be read
No member to speak after Question put
Speaking twice to a Question
Point of Order
Rules of Debate
Anticipating debate

-- 71 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 72
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
GENERAL
SUBJECT MATTER SPECIFIC MATTER TO BE ADDRESSED
Proceedings of Select Committees not to be referred to
Contents of speeches
Matters sub judice or secret
Declaration of interest
Responsibility for statement of fact
Member who has spoken to question may speak to
amendment
Debate on amendment confined to amendment
Reserving rights of speech
Closure of debate
Adjournment of debate
Limitation of Debate Limitation of debate
Maintenance of order
Security checks
Firearms and other offensive weapon
Lady members’ handbags
When the Speaker rises members to be silent
Members and the Chair
Members to be seated
Members to remain in their places until the Speaker has
left the Chamber
Irrelevance or repetition
Disorderly conduct
Member may be suspended after being named
Member suspended to withdraw from precincts of the
Assembly Duration of suspension of a member
Action to be taken on refusal to withdraw
Order In the
Assembly and In
Committee of the
Whole Assembly
Grave disorder
Application and limitation
Introduction of Bills
Printing of amending provisions
Memorandum of Objects and Reasons
Public Bills
Publication

-- 72 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
73 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
GENERAL
SUBJECT MATTER SPECIFIC MATTER TO BE ADDRESSED
Not more than one stage of a Bill to be taken at the same
sitting Reading of Bills
First Reading
Committal of Bills to Committees
Second Reading
Committal of Bills to Committee of the whole Assembly
Sequence to be observed on a Bill in Committee
Procedure in Committee of the whole Assembly on a Bill
Report of Progress
Bill to be reported
Procedure on Bills reported from Committee of the whole
Assembly Procedure on Bills reported from Select
Committees
Procedure upon the re-committal of a Bill
Withdrawal of Bills
Third Reading
Re-introduction of Bills
Custody of Bills
Limits on consideration of matters by Committee
Committee of the whole Assembly may not adjourn
Report
No debate on Motion for Report
Committee of the
Whole Assembly
Chairperson leaves Chair without question put when
directed to report General application of rules in
Committee
Assembly Business Committee
Nomination of members of select committees
Criteria for nomination
Approval of nomination
Discharge of a member from a committee
Composition of select committees
Chairing of select committees and quorum
Conduct of election
Select Committees
Notice of meetings

-- 73 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 74
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
GENERAL
SUBJECT MATTER SPECIFIC MATTER TO BE ADDRESSED
Sittings of select committees
Member adversely mentioned not to sit
Adjournment for lack of quorum
Frequency of meetings
Failure to attend meetings
Absence of chairperson and vice-chairperson
List of attendance
Minutes of select committees
Summoning of witnesses
Temporary absence of a member of a select committee
Vote of no confidence in the chairperson or vice-
chairperson
Filling of vacancies in select committees
Original vote
Attendance by non-members of select committee
Procedure in select committees
Public access to meetings of select committee
Reports of select committees
Progress reports
Reports on Assembly Resolutions
Joint meetings of committees
Engagement of experts
County Public Accounts & Investments Committee
Budget and Finance Committee
Rules and Programme Committee
Committee on Implementation
Sectoral Committees
Appointment of Sectoral Committees
Limitation of mandate
Committee to be limited to mandate
Meaning of Public Petition	Public Petitions
Member’s statement on presentation of Petition

-- 74 of 76 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 17 of 2012
County Governments
75 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
GENERAL
SUBJECT MATTER SPECIFIC MATTER TO BE ADDRESSED
Petition on Private Bill
Notice of intention to present Petition
Form of Petition
Presentation of Petition
Comments on petitions
Printing of Petitions
Committal of Petitions
General
Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures
Presentation of Budget Policy Paper in liaison with
commission for revenue allocation.
Presentation of Annual Estimates and committal to
Committees Committee of Ways and Means and
Committee of Supply Procedure in Committee of Supply
Procedure on Supplementary Estimates
Consideration of Supply Resolutions
Financial
Procedures
Order of Votes
Journals of the Assembly
Custody of Journals and Record
Hansard reports
Secret or personal matters
Journals, Records
and Broadcast of
Proceedings
Broadcast of Assembly Proceedings
Messages to and from the Senate	Communication with
the Senate Procedure for presentation of reports and other matters
from the Senate
Places to which members of public are not admitted
Exclusion of the public
The Public
Press representatives infringing Standing Orders or the
Speaker’s Rules
In cases not provided for, the Speaker to decide
Exemption of business from Standing Orders
Seating in the Chamber
Members travelling outside the County or outside Kenya
General
Expenses of witnesses

-- 75 of 76 --

No. 17 of 2012 [Rev. 2012]
County Governments
[Issue 1] 76
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
GENERAL
SUBJECT MATTER SPECIFIC MATTER TO BE ADDRESSED
Suspension and
Amendment of
Standing Orders
Broadcasting of Assembly proceedings
Protection of the dignity of the Assembly
External media houses
Broadcasting Rules
Breach of broadcasting Rules

-- 76 of 76 --