LAWS OF KENYA
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
No. 8 of 1999
Revised Edition 2012 [1999]
Published by the National Council for Law Reporting
with the Authority of the Attorney-General
www.kenyalaw.org

-- 1 of 302 --

-- 2 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
3 [Issue 1]
NO. 8 OF 1999
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Section
1. Short title.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – GENERAL PRINCIPLES
3. Entitlement to a clean and healthy environment.
PART III – ADMINISTRATION
The National Environment Council
4. Establishment of the National Environment Council.
5. Functions of the Council.
6. Procedure of the Council.
The Authority
7. Establishment of the National Environment Management Authority.
8. Headquarters.
9. Objects and functions of the Authority.
10. Board of the Authority.
11. Powers of the Authority.
12. Powers in respect of lead agencies.
13. Conduct of business and affairs of the Authority.
14. Remuneration of Director-General and Directors.
15. Delegation by the Authority.
16. Staff of the Authority.
17. The common seal of the Authority.
18. Protection from personal liability.
19. Liability of the Authority for damages.
20. General fund.
21. Financial year.
22. Annual estimates.
23. Accounts and audit.
24. National Environment Trust Fund.
25. National Environment Restoration Fund.
26. Investment of funds and disposal of assets.
27. Annual Financial Report.
28. Deposit Bonds.

-- 3 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 4
Provincial and District Environment Committees
Section
29. Provincial and District Environment Committees.
30. Functions of Provincial and District Environment Committees.
31. Public Complaints Committees.
32. Functions of the Complaints Committee.
33. Powers of the Complaints Committee.
34. Proceedings of the Complaints Committee privileged.
35. Disclosure of interest.
36. Remuneration and other expenses of the Complaints Committee.
PART IV – ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
37. National Environment Action Plan Committee.
38. Provisions of the National Environment Action Plan.
39. Provincial Environment Action Plans.
40. District Environment Action Plans.
41. Contents of Provincial and District Environment Action Plans.
PART V – PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
42. Protection of rivers, lakes and wetlands.
43. Protection of traditional interests.
44. Protection of hill tops, hill sides, mountain areas and forests.
45. Identification of hilly and mountainous areas.
46. Re-forestation and afforestation of hill tops, hill slopes and mountainous areas.
47. Other measures for management of hill tops, hill sides and mountainous areas.
48. Protection of forests.
49. Conservation of energy and planting of trees or woodlots.
50. Conservation of biological diversity.
51. Conservation of biological resources in-situ.
52. Conservation of biological resources ex-situ.
53. Access to genetic resources of Kenya.
54. Protection of environmentally significant areas.
55. Protection of the coastal zone.
56. Protection of the ozone layer.
57. Fiscal incentives.
PART VI – ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
58. Application for an Environmental Impact Assessment Licence.
59. Publication of Environmental Impact Assessment.
60. Comments on Environmental Impact Assessment report by Lead Agencies.
61. Technical Advisory Committee on Environmental Impact Assessment.
62. Further Environmental Impact Assessment.
63. Environmental Impact Licence.
64. Submission of fresh Environmental Impact Assessment report after Environmental
Impact Assessment License issued.
65. Transfer of Environmental Impact Assessment Licence.

-- 4 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
5 [Issue 1]
Section
66. Protection in respect of an Environmental Impact Assessment Licence.
67. Revocation, suspension or cancellation of Environmental Impact Assessment Licence.
PART VII – ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT AND MONITORING
68. Environmental audit.
69. Environmental monitoring.
PART VIII – ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY STANDARDS
70. Establishment of a Standards and Enforcement Review Committee.
71. Functions of the Standards and Enforcement Review Committee.
72. Water and pollution prohibition.
73. Duty to supply plant information to the Authority.
74. Effluents to be discharged only into sewerage system.
75. Licence to discharge effluents.
76. Cancellation of effluent discharge licence.
77. Register of effluent discharge licences.
78. Air quality standards.
79. Controlled areas.
80. Licensing emissions.
81. Issue of emission licence.
82. Emissions by motor vehicles and other conveyances.
83. Additional licensing procedures.
84. Cancellation of emission licence.
85. Register of emission of licences.
86. Standards for waste.
87. Prohibition against dangerous handling and disposal of wastes.
88. Application for waste licence.
89. Licences for existing wastes disposal sites and plants.
90. Court orders to cease operation.
91. Hazardous wastes.
92. Regulations of toxic and hazardous materials etc.
93. Prohibition of discharge of hazardous substances, chemicals and materials or oil
into the environment and spiller’s liability.
94. Standards of pesticides and toxic substances.
95. Repealed
96. Repealed
97. Registration of pesticides and toxic substances.
98. Offences relating to pesticides and toxic substances.
99. Seizure of pesticides and toxic substances.
100. Regulations regarding registration of pesticides and toxic substances.
101. Standards for noise.
102. Noise in excess of established standards prohibited.
103. Exemptions in respect of noise standards.
104. Standards for ionising and other radiation.
105. to 106. Repealed.
107. Standards for the control of noxious smells.

-- 5 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 6
PART IX – ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION ORDERS, ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSERVATION ORDERS AND ENVIRONMENTAL EASEMENTS
Section
108. Issue of environmental restoration orders.
109. Contents of environmental restoration orders.
110. Reconsideration of environmental restoration order.
111. Issue of environmental restoration order by a court.
112. Environmental easements and environmental conservation orders.
113. Application to court for environmental easement.
114. Enforcement of environmental easements.
115. Registration of environmental easements.
116. Compensation for environmental easements.
PART X – INSPECTION, ANALYSIS AND RECORDS
117. Appointment of Environmental inspectors.
118. Environmental Inspector’s powers to prosecute.
119. Procedures for laboratories analysis of samples.
120. Certificate of analysis and its effect.
121. Records to be kept.
122. Transmission of records to the Authority.
123. Public Access to records transmitted to the Authority.
PART XI – INTERNATIONAL TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS
124. Conventions, agreements and treaties on environment.
PART XII – NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL
125. Establishment of the National Environment Tribunal.
126. Proceedings of the Tribunal.
127. Awards of the Tribunal.
128. Quorum for determination by Tribunal.
129. Appeals to the Tribunal.
130. Appeals to the High Court.
131. Power to appoint Environment Assessors.
132. Power to seek the directions of the Tribunal in complex matters, etc.
133. Immunity.
134. Remuneration of members of Tribunal.
135. Appointment of a Secretary to the Tribunal.
136. Powers to establish other Tribunals.
PART XIII – ENVIRONMENTAL OFFENCES
137. Offences relating to inspection.
138. Offences relating to Environmental Impact Assessment.
139. Offences relating to records.
140. Offences relating to standards.
141. Offences relating to hazardous wastes, materials, chemicals and radioactive
substances.
142. Offences relating to pollution.

-- 6 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
7 [Issue 1]
Section
143. Offences relating to Environmental restoration orders, easements, and conservation
orders.
144. General penalty.
145. Offences by bodies corporate, Partnerships, Principals and Employers.
146. Forfeiture, cancellation and other orders.
PART XIV – REGULATIONS
147. Power to make regulations.
148. Existing laws.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
SECOND SCHEDULE – PROJECTS TO UNDERGO ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT ASSESSMENT
THIRD SCHEDULE

-- 7 of 302 --

-- 8 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
9 [Issue 1]
NO. 8 OF 1999
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Date of assent: 6th January, 2000.]
[Date of commencement: 14th January, 2000.]
An Act of Parliament to provide for the establishment of an appropriate
legal and institutional framework for the management of the
environment and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
[Act No. 6 of 2006, Act No. 17 of 2006, Act No. 5 of 2007, Act No. 6 of 2009.]
WHEREAS it is desirable that a framework environmental legislation be
promulgated so as to establish an appropriate legal and institutional
framework for the management of the environment;
AND WHEREAS it is recognised that improved legal and administrative co-
ordination of the diverse sectoral initiatives is necessary in order to improve
the national capacity for the management of the environment;
AND WHEREAS the environment constitutes the foundation of national
economic, social, cultural and spiritual advancement;
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by the Parliament of Kenya, as follows—
PART I – PRELIMINARY
1. Short title
This Act may be cited as the Environmental Management and Co-ordination
Act, 1999.
2. Interpretation
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
“air quality” means the concentration prescribed under or pursuant to this
Act of a pollutant in the atmosphere at the point of measurement;
“ambient air” means the atmosphere surrounding the earth but does not
include the atmosphere within a structure or within any underground space;
“analysis” means the testing or examination of any matter, substance or
process for the purpose of determining its composition or qualities or its effect
(whether physical, chemical or biological) on any segment of the environment
or examination of emissions or recording of noise or sub-sonic vibrations to
determine the level or other characteristics of the noise or sub-sonic vibration
or its effect on any segments of the environment;
“Analyst” means an analyst appointed or designated under section 119;
“annual report on the state of the environment” means the report
prepared and issued under section 9;
“Authority” means the National Environment Management Authority
established under section 7;

-- 9 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 10
“beneficial use” means a use of the environment or any element or
segment of the environment that is conducive to public health, welfare or
safety and which requires protection from the effects of wastes, discharges,
emissions and deposits;
“benefited environment” means that environment which has benefited
through the imposition of one or more obligations on the burdened land;
“biological diversity” means the variability among living organisms from
all sources including, terrestrial ecosystems, aquatic ecosystems and the
ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity within
species, among species and of ecosystems;
“biological resources” include genetic resources organisms or parts
thereof, populations, or any other biotic component or ecosystems with actual
or potential use or value for humanity;
“burdened land” means any land upon which an environmental
easement has been imposed;
“chemical” means a chemical substance in any form whether by itself or
in a mixture or preparation, whether manufactured or derived from nature and
for the purposes of this Act includes industrial chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers
and drugs;
“coastal zone” means any area declared to be a protected coastal zone
under section 55;
“Continental Shelf” means the exclusive economic zone established
under section 4 of the Maritime Zones Act (Cap. 171);
“controlled area” means any area designated as such by the Minister
under this Act;
“Deposit Bond” means a deposit bond paid under section 28;
“developer” means a person who is developing a project which is subject
to an environmental impact assessment process under this Act;
“Director” means a Director appointed under section 10;
“Director-General” means the Director-General of the Authority
appointed under section 10;
“District Environment Action Plan” means the District Environment
Action Plan prepared under section 40;
“District Environment Committee” means the District Environment
Committee appointed under section 29;
“ecosystem” means a dynamic complex of plant, animal, micro-organism
communities and their non-living environment interacting as a functional unit;
“effluent” means gaseous waste, water or liquid or other fluid of domestic,
agricultural, trade or industrial origin treated or untreated and discharged
directly or indirectly into the aquatic environment;

-- 10 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
11 [Issue 1]
“element” in relation to the environment mean any of the principal
constituent parts of the environment including water, atmosphere, soil,
vegetation, climate, sound, odour, aesthetics, fish and wildlife;
“environment” includes the physical factors of the surroundings of human
beings including land, water, atmosphere, climate, sound, odour, taste, the
biological factors of animals and plants and the social factor of aesthetics and
includes both the natural and the built environment;
“environmental audit” means the systematic, documented, periodic and
objective evaluation of how well environmental organisation, management
and equipment are performing in conserving or preserving the environment;
“environmental easement” means an easement imposed under
section 112;
“environmental education” includes the process of recognising values
and clarifying concepts in order to develop skills and attitudes necessary to
understand and appreciate the inter-relatedness among man, his culture and
his biophysical surroundings;
“environmental impact assessment” means a systematic examination
conducted to determine whether or not a programme, activity or project will
have any adverse impacts on the environment;
“Environmental Inspector” means any environmental inspector
appointed or designated under section 117;
“environmental management” includes the protection, conservation and
sustainable use of the various elements or components of the environment;
“environmental monitoring” means the continuous or periodic
determination of actual and potential effects of any activity or phenomenon on
the environment whether short-term or long term;
“environmental planning” means both long-term and short-term planning
that takes into account environmental exigencies;
“environmental resources” includes the resources of the air, land, flora,
fauna and water together with their aesthetical qualities;
“environmental restoration order” means an order issued under section
108;
“environmentally friendly” includes any phenomenon or activity that
does not cause harm or degradation to the environment;
“ex-situ conservation” means conservation outside the natural
ecosystem and habitat of the biological organism;
“exclusive economic zone” means the exclusive economic zone
established and delimited under section 4 of the Maritime Zones Act (Cap. 371);
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the thirtieth
June in every year;
“General Fund” means the General Fund established under section 20;
“genetic resources” means genetic material of actual or potential value;

-- 11 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 12
“good environmental practice” means practice that is in accordance
with the provisions of this Act or any other relevant law;
“hazardous substance” means any chemical, waste, gas, medicine,
drug, plant, animal or microrganism which is likely to be injurious to human
health or the environment;
“hazardous waste” means any waste which has been determined by the
Authority to be hazardous waste or to belong to any other category of waste
provided for in section 91;
“in-situ conservation” means conservation within the natural ecosystem
and habitat of the biological organism;
“intergenerational equity” means that the present generation should
ensure that in exercising its rights to beneficial use of the environment the
health, diversity and productivity of the environment is maintained or
enhanced for the benefit of future generations;
“intragenerational equity” means that all people within the present
generation have the right to benefit equally from the exploitation of the
environment, and that they have an equal entitlement to a clean and healthy
environment;
“lead agency” means any Government ministry, department, parastatal,
state corporation or local authority, in which any law vests functions of control
or management or any element of the environment or natural resources;
“local authority” has the meaning assigned to it in section 2 of the Local
Government Act (Cap. 265);
“Minister” means the Minister for the time being responsible for matters
relating to the Environment;
“mixture containing oil” means a mixture of substances or liquids with
such oil content as may be specified under this Act or, if such oil content is not
specified, a mixture with an oil content of one hundred parts or more in one
million parts of the mixture;
“National Council of Non-Governmental Organisations” means the
Council established by section 23 of the Non-Governmental Organizations
Co-ordination Act, 1990 (No. 19 of 1990);
“National Environment Action Plan” means the plan referred to in
section 37;
“natural resources” include resources of the air, land, water, animals and
plants including their aesthetic qualities;
“noise” means any undesirable sound that is intrinsically objectionable or
that may cause adverse effects on human health or the environment;
“occupational air quality” means the concentration prescribed under or
pursuant to this Act of a substance or energy in the atmosphere within a
structure or under-ground space in which human activities take place;

-- 12 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
13 [Issue 1]
“occupier” means a person in occupational or control of premises, and in
relation to premises different parts of which are occupied by different persons,
means the respective persons in occupation or control of each part;
“oil” includes—
(a) crude oil, refined oil, diesel oil, fuel oil and lubricating oil; and
(b) any other description of oil which may be prescribed;
“owner” in relation to any premises means—
(a) the registered proprietor of the premises;
(b) the lessee, including a sub-lessee of the premises;
(c) the agent or trustee of any other owners described in paragraphs (a)
and (b) of this interpretation section or where such owner as
described in paragraphs (a) and (b) cannot be traced or has died,
his legal personal representative;
(d) the person for the time being receiving the rent of the premises
whether on his own account or as agent or trustee for any other
person or as receiver or who would receive the rent if such premises
were let to a tenant; and
in relation to any ship means the person registered as the owner of the ship or
in the absence of registration, the person owning the ship; except that in the
case of a ship owned by any country and operated by a company which in
that country is registered as the ship’s operator, “owner” shall include such
country and the master of the ship;
“ozone layer” means the layer of the atmospheric zone above the
planetary boundary layer as defined in the Vienna Convention for the
Protection of the Ozone Layer, 1985;
“pollutant” includes any substance whether liquid, solid or gaseous
which—
(a) may directly or indirectly alter the quality of any element of the
receiving environment;
(b) is hazardous or potentially hazardous to human health or the
environment; and
includes objectionable odours, radio-activity, noise, temperature change or
physical, chemical or biological change to any segment or element of the
environment;
“polluter-pays principle” means that the cost of cleaning up any element
of the environment damaged by pollution, compensating victims of pollution,
cost of beneficial uses lost as a result of an act of pollution and other costs
that are connected with or incidental to the foregoing, is to be paid or borne by
the person convicted of pollution under this Act or any other applicable law;
“pollution” means any direct or indirect alteration of the physical, thermal,
chemical, biological, or radio-active properties of any part of the environment
by discharging, emitting, or depositing wastes so as to affect any beneficial
use adversely, to cause a condition which is hazardous or potentially

-- 13 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 14
hazardous to public health, safety or welfare, or to animals, birds, wildlife, fish
or aquatic life, or to plants or to cause contravention of any condition,
limitation, or restriction which is subject to a licence under this Act;
“practicable” means reasonably practicable having regard, among other
things, to local conditions and knowledge and the term “practicable means”
includes the provision and the efficient maintenance of plants and the proper
use thereof, and the supervision by or on behalf of the occupier of any
process or operation;
“precautionary principle” is the principle that where there are threats of
damage to the environment, whether serious or irreversible, lack of full
scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective
measures to prevent environmental degradation;
“premises” include messages, buildings, lands, and hereditaments in
every tenure and machinery, plant or vehicle used in connection with any
trade carried on at any premises;
“project” includes any project, programme or policy that leads to projects
which may have an impact on the environment;
“project report” means a summary statement of the likely environmental
effects of a proposed development referred to in section 58;
“proponent” means a person proposing or executing a project, program
or an undertaking specified in the Second Schedule;
“proprietary information” means information relating to any
manufacturing process, trade secret, trade mark, copyright, patent or formula
protected by law in Kenya or by any international treaty to which Kenya is a
party;
“Provincial Director of Environment” means the Provincial Director of
Environment appointed under section 16;
“Provincial Environment Committee” means the Provincial Environment
Committee appointed under section 29;
“Public Complaints Committee” means the Public Complaints
Committee established under section 31;
“radiation” includes ionising radiation and any other radiation likely to
have adverse effects on human health and the environment;
“regional development authority” means a regional development
authority established by an Act of Parliament;
“regulations” mean regulations made under this Act;
“Restoration Fund” means the National Environment Restoration Fund
established under section 25;
“segment” in relation to the environment means any portion or portions of
the environment expressed in terms of volume, space, area, quantity, quality
or time or any combination thereof;
“ship” includes every description of vessel or craft or floating structure;

-- 14 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
15 [Issue 1]
“soil” includes earth, sand, rock, shales, minerals, vegetation, and the
flora and fauna in the soil and derivatives thereof such as dust;
“standard” means the limits of discharge or emissions established under
this Act or under regulations made pursuant to this Act or any other written
law;
“sustainable development” means development that meets the needs of
the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations
to meet their needs by maintaining the carrying capacity of the supporting
ecosystems;
“sustainable use” means present use of the environment or natural
resources which does not compromise the ability to use the same by future
generations or degrade the carrying capacity of supporting ecosystems;
“territorial waters” means territorial waters provided for under section 3
of the Maritime Zones Act (Cap. 371);
“trade” means any trade, business or undertaking whether originally
carried on at fixed premises or at varying places which may result in the
discharge of substances and energy and includes any activity prescribed to
be a trade, business or undertaking for the purposes of this Act;
“Tribunal” means the National Environment Tribunal established under
section 125;
“Trust Fund” means the National Environment Trust Fund established
under section 24;
“waste” includes any matter prescribed to be waste and any matter
whether liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, which is discharged, emitted or
deposited in the environment in such volume, composition or manner likely to
cause an alteration of the environment;
“water” includes drinking water, river, stream, water-course, reservoir,
well, dam, canal, channel, lake swamp, open drain, or underground water;
“wetland” means areas permanently or seasonally flooded by water
where plants and animals have become adapted.
PART II – GENERAL PRINCIPLES
3. Entitlement to a clean and healthy environment
(1) Every person in Kenya is entitled to a clean and healthy environment and
has the duty to safeguard and enhance the environment.
(2) The entitlement to a clean and healthy environment under subsection (1)
includes the access by any person in Kenya to the various public elements or
segments of the environment for recreational, educational, health, spiritual and
cultural purposes.
(3) If a person alleges that the entitlement conferred under subsection (1) has
been, is being or is likely to be contravened in relation to him, then without
prejudice to any other action with respect to the same matter which is lawfully

-- 15 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 16
available, that person may apply to the High Court for redress and the High Court
may make such orders, issue such writs or give such directions as it may deem
appropriate to—
(a) prevent, stop or discontinue any act or omission deleterious to the
environment;
(b) compel any public officer to take measures to prevent or discontinue
any act or omission deleterious to the environment;
(c) require that any on-going activity be subjected to an environment
audit in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(d) compel the persons responsible for the environmental degradation
to restore the degraded environment as far as practicable to its
immediate condition prior to the damage; and
(e) provide compensation for any victim of pollution and the cost of
beneficial uses lost as a result of an act of pollution and other losses
that are connected with or incidental to the foregoing.
(4) A person proceeding under subsection (3) of this section shall have the
capacity to bring an action notwithstanding that such a person cannot show that
the defendant’s act or omission has caused or is likely to cause him any personal
loss or injury provided that such action—
(a) is not frivolous or vexatious; or
(b) is not an abuse of the court process.
(5) In exercising the jurisdiction conferred upon it under subsection (3), the
High Court shall be guided by the following principles of sustainable
development—
(a) the principle of public participation in the development of policies,
plans and processes for the management of the environment;
(b) the cultural and social principles traditionally applied by any
community in Kenya for the management of the environment or
natural resources in so far as the same are relevant and are not
repugnant to justice and morality or inconsistent with any written
law;
(c) the principle of international co-operation in the management of
environmental resources shared by two or more states;
(d) the principles of intergenerational and intragenerational equity;
(e) the polluter-pays principle; and
(f) the pre-cautionary principle.
PART III – ADMINISTRATION
The National Environment Council
4. Establishment of the National Environment Council
(1) There is established a council to be known as the National Environment
Council (hereinafter referred to as the “Council”) which shall consist of—
(a) the Minister who shall be the chairman;

-- 16 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
17 [Issue 1]
(b) the Permanent Secretaries in the Ministries for the time being
responsible for the matters specified in the First Schedule;
(c) two representatives of public universities in Kenya to be appointed
by the Minister;
(d) two representatives of specialised research institutions in Kenya to
be appointed by the Minister;
(e) three representatives of the business community, to be appointed by
the Minister, one of whom shall be a representative of oil marketing
companies;
(f) two representatives of Non-Governmental organisations active in
the environmental field to be appointed by the Minister;
(g) the Director-General who shall be the secretary; and
(h) such number of other members as may, from time, be co-opted by
the Minister to be members of the Council.
(2) Every appointment under paragraph (f) of subsection (1) shall be made
from a list of nominees submitted by the Non-Governmental Organizations
Council.
(3) Every appointment under paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (f) and (h) of subsection (1)
shall be by name and by notice in the Gazette and shall be for a renewable period of
three years, but shall cease if the appointee—
(a) serves the Minister with a written notice of resignation; or
(b) is absent from three consecutive meetings of the Council without the
permission of the Minister; or
(c) is convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term
exceeding six months or to a fine exceeding ten thousand shillings;
or
(d) is incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness from
performing his duties as a member of the Council; or
(e) conducts himself in a manner deemed by the Minister, in
consultation with the Council, to be inconsistent with membership of
the Council; or
(f) is adjudged bankrupt or has entered into a scheme or arrangement
with his creditors.
5. Functions of the Council
The Council shall—
(a) be responsible for policy formulation and directions for purposes of
this Act;
(b) set national goals and objectives and determine policies and
priorities for the protection of the environment;
(c) promote co-operation among public departments, local authorities,
private sector, Non-Governmental Organisations and such other
organizations engaged in environmental protection programmes;
and
(d) perform such other functions as are assigned under this Act.

-- 17 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 18
6. Procedure of the Council
(1) The Council shall meet at least four times in every financial year, at such
place as it may deem appropriate for the transaction of its business.
(2) The Minister shall preside at all meetings of the Council but in his
absence a person appointed by him shall preside on his behalf at such a
meeting.
(3) The secretary to the Council shall prepare and keep all the records of the
business conducted at the meetings of the Council.
(4) The powers of the Council shall not be affected by any vacancy in the
membership thereof nor by any defect in the appointment of a person purporting
to be a member of the Council.
(5) Subject to this section, the Council shall regulate its own procedure.
The Authority
7. Establishment of the National Environment Management Authority
(1) There is established an Authority to be known as the National
Environment Management Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a
common seal and shall, in its corporate name, be capable of—
(a) suing and being sued;
(b) taking, purchasing, charging and disposing of movable and
immovable property,
(c) borrowing money;
(d) entering into contracts; and
(e) doing or performing all such other things or acts for the proper
administration of this Act, which may lawfully be performed by a
body corporate.
8. Headquarters
The Headquarters of the Authority shall be in Nairobi.
9. Objects and functions of the Authority
(1) The object and purpose for which the Authority is established is to
exercise general supervision and co-ordination over all matters relating to the
environment and to be the principal instrument of Government in the
implementation of all policies relating to the environment.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Authority shall—
(a) co-ordinate the various environmental management activities being
undertaken by the lead agencies and promote the integration of
environmental considerations into development policies, plans,
programmes and projects with a view to ensuring the proper
management and rational utilization of environmental resources on
a sustainable yield basis for the improvement of the quality of
human life in Kenya;

-- 18 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
19 [Issue 1]
(b) take stock of the natural resources in Kenya and their utilisation and
conservation;
(c) establish and review in consultation with the relevant lead agencies,
land use guidelines;
(d) examine land use patterns to determine their impact on the quality
and quantity of natural resources;
(e) carry out surveys which will assist in the proper management and
conservation of the environment;
(f) advise the Government on legislative and other measures for the
management of the environment or the implementation of relevant
international conventions, treaties and agreements in the field of
environment, as the case may be;
(g) advise the Government on regional and international environmental
conventions, treaties and agreements to which Kenya should be a
party and follow up the implementation of such agreements where
Kenya is a party;
(h) undertake and co-ordinate research, investigation and surveys in
the field of environment and collect, collate and disseminate
information about the findings of such research, investigation or
survey;
(i) mobilise and monitor the use of financial and human resources for
environmental management;
(j) identify projects and programmes or types of projects and
programmes, plans and policies for which environmental audit or
environmental monitoring must be conducted under this Act;
(k) initiate and evolve procedures and safeguards for the prevention of
accidents which may cause environmental degradation and evolve
remedial measures where accidents occur;
(l) monitor and assess activities, including activities being carried out
by relevant lead agencies, in order to ensure that the environment is
not degraded by such activities, environmental management
objectives are adhered to and adequate early warning on impending
environmental emergencies is given;
(m) undertake, in co-operation with relevant lead agencies, programmes
intended to enhance environmental education and public awareness
about the need for sound environmental management as well as for
enlisting public support and encouraging the effort made by other
entities in that regard;
(n) publish and disseminate manuals, codes or guidelines relating to
environmental management and prevention or abatement of
environmental degradation;
(o) render advice and technical support, where possible, to entities
engaged in natural resources management and environmental
protection so as to enable them to carry out their responsibilities
satisfactorily;

-- 19 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 20
(p) prepare and issue an annual report on the state of the environment
in Kenya and in this regard may direct any lead agency to prepare
and submit to it a report on the state of the sector of the
environment under the administration of that lead agency;
(q) perform such other functions as the Government may assign to the
Authority or as are incidental or conducive to the exercise by the
Authority of any or all of the functions provided under this Act.
(3) The Minister shall lay every annual report on the state of the environment
prepared under subsection (2)(p) before the National Assembly as soon as
reasonably practicable after its publication where the National Assembly is in
session, or where not in session, within twenty-one days of the day the National
Assembly next sits after such publication.
10. Board of the Authority
(1) The Authority shall be managed by a Board, which shall consist of—
(a) a chairman appointed by the President;
(b) the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry for the time being
responsible for matters relating to the Authority or an officer of that
Ministry designated in writing by the Permanent Secretary;
(c) a Director-General appointed by the President;
(d) three Directors who shall be officers of the Authority;
(e) seven members, not being public officers, appointed by the Minister
in consultation with the Council; and
(f) the Secretary to the Board, who shall be appointed by the Authority.
(2) No person shall be appointed under subsections (1)(a), (c), (d) or (e)
unless such person holds at least a post-graduate degree from a recognized
university in the fields of environmental law, environmental science, natural
resource management or a relevant social science and in the case of the
Director-General, has at least fifteen years’ working experience in the relevant
field.
(3) The members referred to under subsection (1)(a) and (e) of subsection (1)
shall be appointed at different times so that the respective expiry dates of their
terms of office shall fall at different times.
(4) The members appointed under paragraph (a), (c) and (e) of subsection (1)
shall hold office for a term of four years and shall be eligible for reappointment for
one further term of four years.
(5) The Board shall elect a Vice-Chairman from among the members
appointed under paragraph (e) of subsection (1).
(6) The Board shall meet at least four times in every financial year.
(7) The Chairman shall preside at every meeting of the Board at which he is
present, but in his absence the Vice-Chairman shall preside, and in his absence,
the members present shall elect one of their number who shall, with respect to
that meeting and the business transacted thereat have all the powers of the
Chairman.

-- 20 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
21 [Issue 1]
(8) Unless a unanimous decision is reached, a decision on any matter before
the Board shall be by a majority of votes of the members present and in the case
of an equality of votes, the Chairman or person presiding shall have a casting
vote.
(9) The quorum for the transaction of the business of the Board shall be
seven members including the person presiding; and all acts, matters or things
authorised or required to be done by the Board, shall be effected by a resolution
passed by a majority of the members present and voting.
(10) The Secretary to the Board shall not be entitled to vote on any matter
before the Board.
(11) The appointment of a member of the Board may be terminated by the
appointing authority where the member—
(a) is adjudged bankrupt or enters into a composition or scheme of
arrangement with his creditors;
(b) is convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term
of six months or more without the option of a fine;
(c) is incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness from
performing his duties as a member of the Board; or
(d) becomes, for any reason, incapable or incompetent of properly
performing the functions of his office.
(12) Where a member of the Board dies or resigns or otherwise vacates
office before the expiry of his term of office, the appointing authority shall appoint
another person in the place of such member.
(13) Where the Director-General is unable to perform the functions of his
office due to any temporary incapacity which is likely to be prolonged, the
President may appoint a substitute therefore to act with the full powers of the
Director-General until such time as the President determines that the incapacity
has ceased.
(14) (a) The Director-General shall be the chief executive of the Authority
and shall subject to this Act, be responsible for the day to day management of
the affairs of the Authority;
(b) A Director shall perform such functions as are conferred by this Act
and such additional duties as may be assigned by the Director-General;
(c) The Director-General and the Directors of the Authority shall be paid
such salaries and allowances as may, from time to time, be determined by the
President.
(15) Subject to subsections (6), (7), (8) and (9) the Board shall regulate its
own procedure.
11. Powers of the Authority
The Authority shall have all powers necessary for the proper performance of
its functions under this Act and in particular, but without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing, the Authority shall have powers to—
(a) control, supervise and administer the assets of the Authority in such
manner as best promotes the purpose for which the Authority is
established;

-- 21 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 22
(b) determine the provisions to be made for capital and recurrent
expenditure and for reserves of the Authority;
(c) receive any grants, gifts, donations or endowments and make
legitimate disbursements therefrom;
(d) enter into association with other bodies or organisations within or
outside Kenya as the Authority may consider desirable or
appropriate and in furtherance of the purpose for which the Authority
is established;
(e) open a banking account or banking accounts for the funds of the
Authority; and
(f) invest any funds of the Authority not immediately required for its
purposes in the manner provided in section 26.
12. Powers in respect of lead agencies
The Authority may after giving reasonable notice of its intention so to do,
directly lead agency to perform, within such time and in such manner as it shall
specify, any of the duties imposed upon the lead agency by or under this Act or
any other written law, in the field of environment and if the lead agency fails to
comply with such directions, the Authority may itself perform or cause to be
performed the duties in question, and the expense incurred by it in so doing shall
be a civil debt recoverable by the Authority from the lead agency.
13. Conduct of business and affairs of the Authority
(1) Subject to this Act, the Authority shall regulate its own procedure.
14. Remuneration of Director-General and Directors
The Authority shall pay the Director-General and the Directors such salaries
and allowances as may, from time to time, be determined by the President, but
those salaries and allowances shall not be altered to their detriment during their
term of office.
15. Delegation by the Authority
Subject to this Act, the Authority may, by resolution either generally or in any
particular case, delegate to any committee of the Authority or to any member,
officer, employee or agent of the Authority, the exercise of any of the powers or
the performance of any of the functions or duties of the Authority under this Act.
16. Staff of the Authority
The Authority may appoint such officers or other staff of the Authority as are
necessary for the proper discharge of its functions under this Act or any other
written law, upon such terms and conditions of service as the Authority may
determine.
17. The common seal of the Authority
The common seal of the authority shall be kept in such custody as the
Authority may direct and shall not be used except on the order of the Authority.

-- 22 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
23 [Issue 1]
18. Protection from personal liability
No matter or thing done by a member of the Authority or any officer, employee
or agent of the Authority shall, if the matter or thing is done bona fide for
executing the functions, powers or duties of the Authority, render the member,
officer, employee or agent or any person acting on his directions personally liable
to any action, claim or demand whatsoever.
19. Liability of the Authority for damages
The provisions of section 18 shall not relieve the Authority of the liability to
pay compensation or damages to any person for any injury to him, his property or
any of his interests caused by the exercise of the powers conferred on the
Authority by this Act or by any other written law or by the failure, whether wholly
or partially, or any works.
20. General fund
(1) There shall be a general fund of the Authority which shall vest in the
Authority.
(2) There shall be paid into the general fund—
(a) such monies or assets as may accrue to or vest in the Authority in
the course of the exercise of its powers or the performance of its
functions under this Act;
(b) such sums as may be granted to the Authority by the Minister
pursuant to subsection (3); and
(c) all monies from any other source provided for or donated or lent to
the Authority.
(3) There shall be made to the Authority out of monies provided by
Parliament for that purpose, grants towards the expenditure incurred by the
Authority in the exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under
this Act.
(4) There shall be paid out of the general fund all sums required to defray the
expenditure incurred by the Authority in the exercise, discharge and performance
of its objectives, functions and duties.
21. Financial year
The financial year of the Authority shall be the period of twelve months ending
on the thirteeth June in each year.
22. Annual estimates
(1) At least three months before the commencement of each financial year,
the Authority shall cause to be prepared estimates of the revenue and
expenditure of the Annual Authority for that year.
(2) The annual estimates shall make provisions for the estimated expenditure
of the Authority for the financial year and in particular, the estimates shall provide
for—
(a) the payment of the salaries, allowances and other charges in
respect of the staff of the Authority;

-- 23 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 24
(b) the payment of pensions, gratuities and other charges in respect of
the staff of the Authority;
(c) the proper maintenance of the buildings and grounds of the
Authority;
(d) the maintenance, repair and replacement of the equipment and
other property of the Authority; and
(e) the creation of such reserve funds to meet future contingent
liabilities in respect of retirement benefits, insurance or replacement
of buildings or equipment, or in respect of such other matter as the
Authority may deem appropriate.
(3) The annual estimates shall be approved by the Authority before the
commencement of the financial year to which they relate and shall be submitted
to the Minister for approval and after the Minister’s approval, the Authority shall
not increase the annual estimates without the consent of the Minister.
23. Accounts and audit
(1) The Authority shall cause to be kept all proper books and records of
accounts of the income, expenditure and assets of the Authority.
(2) Within a period of four months from the end of each financial year, the
Authority shall submit to the Auditor-General (Corporations) or to an auditor
appointed under this section, the accounts of the Authority together with—
(a) a statement of the income and expenditure of the Authority during
that year; and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Authority on the last
day of that year.
(3) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited and reported upon in
accordance with sections 29 and 30A of the Exchequer and Audit Act (Cap. 412),
by the Auditor-General (Corporations), or by an auditor appointed by the
Authority with the approval of the Auditor-General (Corporations) given in
accordance with section 29(2)(b) of the Exchequer and Audit Act (Cap. 412).
24. National Environment Trust Fund
(1) There is hereby established a fund to be known as the National
Environment Trust Fund, (hereinafter referred to as the “Trust Fund”).
(2) The Trust Fund shall consist of—
(a) such sums of money as may be received by the Trust Fund in the
form of donations, endowments, grants and gifts from whatever
source and specifically designated for the Trust Fund;
(b) such sums of money or other assets as may be specifically
designated to the Trust Fund by the Authority out of its general fund.
(3) The Trust Fund shall be vested in the Authority and, subject to this Act,
shall be administered by a Board of five Trustees to be appointed by the Minister
by a notice in the Gazette on such terms and conditions as he deems fit. The
trustees shall be persons holding at least post-graduate degree from a

-- 24 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
25 [Issue 1]
recognized university in the fields of environmental law, economics,
environmental science or natural resource management at the time of their
appointment.
(4) The object of the Trust Fund shall be to facilitate research intended to
further the requirements of environmental management, capacity building,
environmental awards, environmental publications, scholarships and grants.
(5) The Board of Trustees may, on the recommendation of the Council,
determine that certain donations to the Trust Fund shall be applied specifically
and reserved only for prizes and awards for exemplary services to the
environment. Such prizes and awards shall be applied by the recipient
exclusively to the management of the environment.
25. National Environment Restoration Fund
(1) There is hereby established a fund to be known as the National
Environment Restoration Fund, (hereinafter referred to as “The Restoration
Fund”).
(2) The Restoration Fund shall consist of—
(a) such proportion of fees or deposit bonds as may be determined by
the Authority from time to time;
(b) such sums as may be donated or levied from industries and other
projects proponents as a contribution towards the Restoration Fund.
(3) The Restoration Fund shall be vested in the Authority and, subject to this
Act, shall be administered by the Director-General.
(4) The object of the Restoration Fund shall be as supplementary insurance
for the mitigation of environmental degradation where the perpetrator is not
identifiable or where exceptional circumstances require the Authority to intervene
towards the control or mitigation of environmental degradation.
(5) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, issue orders for the levying of
funds from project proponents towards the Restoration Fund.
26. Investment of funds and disposal of assets
(1) Subject to this Act, the Authority may, invest any of its funds in securities
in which trustees may, for the time being, invest trust funds or in any other
securities which the Treasury may, from time to time, approve for that purpose.
(2) Subject to this Act, the Authority may place on deposit with such bank or
banks as it may determine, any moneys not immediately required for its
purposes.
(3) The assets of the Authority may be disposed of—
(a) if they are current assets, in the normal course of business carried
on by the Authority;
(b) where the disposal and the utilization of the proceeds have been
taken into account in an annual estimate prepared and approved in
accordance with section 22;

-- 25 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 26
(c) by way of sale or otherwise with the approval of the Minister and the
Treasury where such disposal has not been taken into account in
the estimates.
27. Annual Financial Report
(1) As soon as practicable and not later than three months after the expiry of
the financial year, the Director-General shall submit to the Council a financial
report concerning the activities of the Authority during such financial year.
(2) The report of the Director-General under subsection (1) shall include
information on the financial affairs of the Authority and shall be appended to the
report—
(a) an audited statement of income and expenditure of the previous
financial year,
(b) estimates of income and expenditure of the Authority for the next
ensuing financial year.
(3) The Minister shall not later than fourteen days after the sitting of the
National Assembly next after receipt of the report referred to in subsection (1) lay
it before the National Assembly.
28. Deposit Bonds
(1) The Authority shall create a register of those activities and industrial
plants and undertakings which have or are most likely to have significant adverse
effects on the environment when operated in a manner that is not in conformity
with good environmental practices.
(2) The Minister responsible for Finance may, on the recommendations of the
Council, prescribe that persons engaged in activities or operating industrial plants
and other undertakings identified under subsection (1) pay such deposit bonds
as may constitute appropriate security for good environmental practice.
(3) The deposit bond determined in accordance with subsection (2) shall be
refunded to the operator of the activity, industrial plant or any other undertaking
by the Authority after such duration not exceeding twenty-four months without
interest where the operator has observed good environmental practices to the
satisfaction of the Authority.
(4) The Authority may, after giving the operator an opportunity to be heard,
confiscate a deposit bond where the operator is responsible for environmental
practice that is in breach of the provisions of this Act, and the Authority may in
addition cancel any license issued to the operator under this Act if the Authority is
satisfied that the operator has become a habitual offender.
(5) Where an operator is dissatisfied with the confiscation of his deposit bond
under this Act, he may refer the matter to a competent court of law.
(6) The proceeds of every refundable deposit bond levied under this section
shall be paid into the Restoration Fund and shall be treated as part of the
Restoration Fund until refunded to the depositor subject to subjection (3) or
confiscated by the Authority.
(7) Any interest accruing from monies deposited into the Restoration Fund
under this section shall be for the benefit of the Authority.

-- 26 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
27 [Issue 1]
Provincial and District Environment Committees
29. Provincial and District Environment Committees
(1) The Minister shall by notice in the Gazette, appoint Provincial and District
Environment Committees of the Authority in respect of every province and district
respectively.
(2) Every Provincial Environment Committee shall consist of—
(a) the Provincial Commissioner of the Province who shall be the
chairman;
(b) the Provincial Director of Environment of the Province who shall be
the Secretary;
(c) one representative each of the Ministries responsible for the matters
specified in the First Schedule at the provincial level;
(d) a representative of every local authority whose area of jurisdiction
falls wholly or partly within the province;
(e) two representatives of farmers or pastoralists within the province to
be appointed by the Minister;
(f) two representatives of the business community operating within the
concerned Province appointed by the Minister;
(g) two representatives of the non-governmental organisations engaged
in environmental management programmes within the province
appointed by the Minister in consultation with the National Council of
Non-Governmental Organisations; and
(h) a representative of every regional development authority whose
area of jurisdiction falls wholly or partially within the province.
(3) Every District Environment Committee shall consist of—
(a) the District Commissioner of the district who shall be the chairman;
(b) the District Environment Officer of the district who shall be the
secretary;
(c) one representative each of the Ministries for the time being
responsible for the matters specified in the First Schedule at the
district level;
(d) a representative of every local authority whose area of jurisdiction
falls wholly or partially within the district;
(e) four representatives of farmers, women, youth and pastoralists
within the district, to be appointed by the Minister;
(f) two representatives of the business community in the district to be
appointed by the Minister;
(g) two representatives of the non-governmental organisations engaged
in environmental management programmes, operating in the district,
to be appointed by the Minister in consultation with the National
Council of Non-Governmental Organisation; and
(h) two representatives of the community-based organisations engaged
in environmental programmes operating in the district, to be
appointed by the Minister.

-- 27 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 28
30. Functions of Provincial and District Environment Committees
The Provincial and District Environment Committees shall—
(a) be responsible for the proper management of the environment within
the province or district in respect of which they are appointed;
(b) perform such additional functions as are prescribed by the Act or as
may, from time to time, be assigned by the Minister by notice in the
Gazette.
31. Public Complaints Committees
(1) There is hereby established a committee of the Authority to be known as
the public Complaints Committee (hereinafter referred to as “the Complaints
Committee”) which shall consist of—
(a) a chairman appointed by the Minister and who shall be a person
qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court of Kenya;
(b) a representative of the Attorney-General;
(c) a representative of the Law Society of Kenya;
(d) a representative of non-governmental organisations appointed by
the National Council of Non-Governmental Organisations and who
shall be the secretary of the Complaints Committee;
(e) a representative of the business community appointed by the
Minister;
(f) two members appointed by the Minister for their active role in
environmental management.
(2) The members of the Complaints Committee, other than the members
appointed under subsection (1)(b), shall hold office for a period of three years but
shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that no member shall hold office for more than two terms.
(3) A member of the Complaints Committee other than the member
appointed under subsection (1)(b) may—
(a) at anytime resign from office by notice in writing to the Minister
through the chairman;
(b) be removed from office by the Minister if the member—
(i) has been absent from three consecutive meetings of the
Committee without permission from the chairman;
(ii) is convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to
imprisonment for a term exceeding six months or to a fine
exceeding ten thousand shillings;
(iii) is incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness; or
(iv) is otherwise unable or unfit to discharge his functions.
(4) If a member of the Complaints Committee vacates office before the expiry
of his term, the appointing authority shall appoint a suitable replacement therefor.

-- 28 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
29 [Issue 1]
(5) Where a member of the Complaints Committee is unable to perform the
functions of his office due to any temporary incapacity which may be prolonged,
the appointing authority may appoint a substitute for the member until such time
as the Minister determines the incapacity has ceased.
(6) Subject to this Act, the Complaints Committee shall regulate its own
procedure.
32. Functions of the Complaints Committee
The functions of the Complaints Committee shall be—
(a) to investigate—
(i) any allegations or complaints against any person or against
the Authority in relation to the condition of the environment in
Kenya;
(ii) on its own motion, any suspected case of environmental
degradation,
and to make a report of its findings together with its recommendations
thereon to the Council;
(b) to prepare and submit to the Council, periodic reports of its activities
which report shall form part of the annual report on the state of the
environment under section 9(3); and
(c) to perform such other functions and exercise such powers as may
be assigned to it by the Council.
33. Powers of the Complaints Committee
(1) The Complaints Committee may, by notice in writing, require any person
to—
(a) give to the Complaints Committee all reasonable assistance in
connection with the investigation of any complaint under section 32;
or
(b) appear before the Complaints Committee for examination
concerning matters relevant to the investigation of any complaint
under section 32.
(2) A person who—
(a) refuses or fails to comply with the requirement of the Complaints
Committee which is applicable to him, to the extent to which he is
able to comply with it; or
(b) obstructs or hinders the Complaints Committee in the exercise of his
powers under this Act; or
(c) furnishes information or makes a statement to the Complaints
Committee which he knows to be false or misleading in any material
particular; or
(d) when appearing before the Complaints Committee for examination,
makes a statement which he knows to be false or misleading in any
material particular,
commits an offence.

-- 29 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 30
(3) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (2) shall be liable to a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand shillings.
(4) Where an offence under subsection (2) is a continuing offence, the person
convicted shall, in addition to the penalty prescribed in subsection (3), be liable to
a fine of one thousand shillings for each day during which the offence continues.
34. Proceedings of the Complaints Committee privileged
No proceedings shall lie against the chairman or any member of the
Complaints Committee in respect of anything done bona fide in the performance
of the duties of the Complaints Committee under this Act.
35. Disclosure of interest
(1) If a member of the Complaints Committee is directly or indirectly
interested in any matter before the Complaints Committee and is present at a
meeting of the Complaints Committee at which the matter is the subject of
investigation, he shall, at the meeting and as soon as reasonably practicable
after the commencement thereof, disclose the fact and shall not take part in the
consideration or discussion of, or vote on, any questions in respect of the matter,
or be counted in the quorum of the meeting during the consideration of the
matter.
(2) A disclosure of interest made under subsection (1) shall be recorded in
the minutes of the meeting at which it is made.
36. Remuneration and other expenses of the Complaints Committee
(1) There shall be paid to the chairman and members of the Complaints
Committee, such remuneration, fees or allowances for expenses as the Council
may determine.
(2) The remuneration fees or allowances referred to in subsection (1)
together with any other expenses incurred by the Complaints Committee in the
execution of its functions under this Act shall be paid out of monies provided by
Parliament for that purpose.
PART IV – ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
37. National Environment Action Plan Committee
(1) There is established a committee of the Authority to be known as the
National Environment Action Plan Committee and which shall consist of—
(a) the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry for the time being
responsible for National Economic Planning and Development who
shall be the chairman;
(b) the Permanent Secretaries in the Ministries responsible for the
matters specified in the First Schedule or their duly nominated
representatives;
(c) four representatives of the business community to be appointed by
the Minister;
(d) representatives of each of the institutions specified in the Third
Schedule;

-- 30 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
31 [Issue 1]
(e) five representatives of non-governmental organisations nominated
by the National Council of Non-Governmental Organization;
(f) representatives of specialised research institutions that are engaged
in environmental matters as may be determined by the Minister; and
(g) a Director of the Authority who shall be the secretary.
(2) The National Environment Action Plan Committee shall, after every five
years, prepare a national environment action plan for consideration and adoption
by the National Assembly.
38. Provisions of the National Environment Action Plan
The national environment action plan shall—
(a) contain an analysis of the natural resources of Kenya with an
indication as to any pattern of change in their distribution and
quantity over time;
(b) contain an analytical profile of the various uses and value of the
natural resources incorporating considerations of intragenerational
equity;
(c) recommend appropriate legal and fiscal incentives that may be used
to encourage the business community to incorporate environmental
requirements into their planning and operational processes;
(d) recommend methods for building national awareness through
environmental education on the importance of sustainable use of the
environment and natural resources for national development;
(e) set out operational guidelines for the planning and management of
the environment and natural resources;
(f) identify actual or likely problems as may affect the natural resources
and the broader environment context in which they exist;
(g) identify and appraise trends in the development of urban and rural
settlements, their impacts on the environment, and strategies for the
amelioration of their negative impacts;
(h) propose guidelines for the integration of standards of environmental
protection into development planning and management;
(i) identify and recommend policy and legislative approaches for
preventing, controlling or mitigating specific as well as general
adverse impacts on the environment;
(j) prioritise areas of environmental research and outline methods of
using such research findings;
(jj) take into account and record all monuments and protected areas
declared or deemed to have been declared by the Minister under
the National Museums and Heritage Act;
(k) without prejudice to the foregoing, be reviewed and modified from
time to time to incorporate emerging knowledge and realities; and

-- 31 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 32
(l) be binding on all persons and all government departments,
agencies, state corporations or other organs of Government upon
adoption by the National Assembly.
[Act No. 6 of 2006, s. 77.]
39. Provincial Environment Action Plans
Every Provincial Environment Committee shall, every five years, prepare a
provincial environment action plan in respect of the district for which it is
appointed, incorporating the elements of the relevant district environments action
plans prepared under section 40 and shall submit such plan to the chairman of
the National Environmental Action Plan Committee for incorporation into the
national environment action plan.
40. District Environment Action Plans
Every District Environment Committee shall, every five years, prepare a
district environment action plan in respect of the district for which it is appointed
and shall submit such plan to the chairman of the Provincial Environment Action
Plan Committee for incorporation into the provincial environment action plan
proposed under section 39.
41. Contents of Provincial and District Environment Action Plans
Every provincial environment action plan and every district environment action
plan prepared under section 39 and 40 respectively shall contain provisions
dealing with matters contained in section 38 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i)
and (j) in relation to their respective province or district.
PART V – PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
42. Protection of rivers, lakes and wet lands
(1) No person shall, without the prior written approval of the Director-General
given after an environmental impact assessment, in relation to a river, lake or
wetland in Kenya, carry out any of the following activities—
(a) erect, reconstruct, place, alter, extend, remove or demolish any
structure or part of any structure in, or under the river, lake or
wetland;
(b) excavate, drill, tunnel or disturb the river, lake or wetland;
(c) introduce any animal, whether alien or indigenous, dead or alive, in
any river, lake or wetland;
(d) introduce or plant any part of a plant specimen, whether alien or
indigenous, dead or alive, in any river, lake or wetland;
(e) deposit any substance in a lake, river or wetland or in, on or under
its bed, if that substance would or is likely to have adverse
environmental effects on the river, lake or wetland;
(f) direct or block any river, lake or wetland from its natural and normal
course; or
(g) drain any lake, river or wetland.

-- 32 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
33 [Issue 1]
(2) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, declare a lake shore, wetland,
coastal zone or river bank to be a protected area and impose such restrictions as
he considers necessary, to protect the lake shore, wetland, coastal zone and
river bank from environmental degradation and shall, in doing so, take into
consideration the following factors—
(a) the geographical size of the lake shore, wetland, coastal zone or
river bank; and
(b) the interests of the communities resident around the lake shore,
wetland, coastal zone or river bank concerned.
(3) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, issue general and specific
orders, regulations or standards for the management of river banks, lake shores,
wetlands or coastal zones and such orders, regulations or standards may include
management, protection, or conservation measures in respect of any area at risk
of environmental degradation and shall provide for—
(a) the development of an overall environmental management plan for a
lake, river, wetland or coastal area, taking into account the relevant
sectoral interest;
(b) measures for the prevention or control of coastal erosion;
(c) the conservation of mangrove and coral reef ecosystems;
(d) plans for the harvesting of minerals within the coastal zone,
including strategies for the restoration of mineral sites;
(e) contingency plans for the prevention and control of all deliberate and
accidental discharge of pollutions into the sea, lakes or rivers;
(f) plans for the protection of wetlands;
(g) the regulation of harvesting of aquatic living and non-living
resources to ensure optimum sustainable yield;
(h) special guidelines for access to and exploitation of living and non-
living resources in the continental shelf, territorial sea and the
Exclusive Economic Zone;
(i) promotion of environmentally friendly tourism; and
(j) the management of biological resources.
(4) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, issue
guidelines for the management of the environment of lakes and rivers.
(5) Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with any orders,
regulations or standards issued under this section shall be guilty of an offence.
[Act No. 5 of 2007, s. 77, Act No. 6 of 2009, Sch.]
43. Protection of traditional interests
The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, declare the traditional interests of
local communities customarily resident within or around a lake shore, wetland,
coastal zone or river bank or forest to be protected interests.
44. Protection of hill tops, hill sides, mountain areas and forests
The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, develop,
issue and implement regulations, procedures, guidelines and measures for the

-- 33 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 34
sustainable use of hill sides, hill tops, mountain areas and forests and such
regulations, guidelines, procedures and measures shall control the harvesting of
forests and any natural resources located in or on a hill side, hill top or mountain
area so as to protect water catchment areas, prevent soil erosion and regulate
human settlement.
45. Identification of hilly and mountainous areas
(1) Every District Environment Committee shall identify the hilly and
mountainous areas under their jurisdiction which are at risk from environmental
degradation.
(2) A hilly or mountainous area is at risk from environmental degradation if—
(a) it is prone to soil erosion;
(b) landslides have occurred in such an area;
(c) vegetation cover has been removed or is likely to be removed from
the area at a rate faster than it is being replaced; or
(d) any other land use activity in such an area is likely to lead to
environment degradation.
(3) Each District Environment Committee shall notify the Director-General of
the hilly and mountainous areas it has identified as being at risk from
environmental degradation under subsection (1).
(4) The Director-General shall maintain a register of hilly and mountainous
area identified under subsection (1) to be at risk from environmental degradation.
46. Re-forestation and afforestation of hill tops, hill slopes and
mountainous areas
(1) Every District Environment Committee shall specify which of the areas
identified in accordance with section 45(1) are to be targeted for afforestation or
reforestation.
(2) Every District Environment Committee shall take measures, through
encouraging voluntary self-help activities in their respective local community, to
plant trees or other vegetation in any area specified under subsection (1) which
are within the limits of its jurisdiction.
(3) Where the areas specified under subsection (1) are subject to leasehold
or any other interest in land including customary tenure, the holder of that interest
shall implement measures required to be implemented by the District
Environment Committee including measures to plant trees and other vegetation
in those areas.
47. Other measures for management of hill tops, hill sides and mountainous
areas
(1) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, issue
guidelines and prescribe measures for the sustainable use of hill tops, hill slides
and mountainous areas.
(2) The guidelines issued and measures prescribed by the Authority under
subsection (1) shall be by way of Gazette Notice and shall include those relating
to—
(a) appropriate farming methods;

-- 34 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
35 [Issue 1]
(b) carrying capacity of the areas described in subsection (1) in relation
to animal husbandry;
(c) measures to curb soil erosion;
(d) disaster preparedness in areas prone to landslides;
(e) the protection of areas referred to in subsection (1) from human
settlements;
(f) the protection of water catchment areas; and
(g) any other measures the Authority considers necessary.
(3) The District Environment Committee shall be responsible for ensuring that
the guidelines issued and measures prescribed under subsection (2) in respect
of their districts are implemented.
(4) Any person who contravenes any measure prescribed by the Authority
under this section or who fails to comply with a lawful direction issued by a
District Environment Committee under this section shall be guilty of an offence.
48. Protection of forests
(1) Subject to subsection (2) the Director-General may, after consultation with
the Chief Conservator of Forests, enter into any contractual arrangement with
private owner of any land on such terms and conditions as may be mutually
agreed for purposes of registering such land as forest land.
(2) The Director-General shall not take any action, in respect of any forest or
mountain area, which is prejudicial to the traditional interests of the local
communities customarily resident within or around such forest or mountain area.
49. Conservation of energy and planting of trees or woodlots
(1) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies,
promote the use of renewable sources of energy by—
(a) promoting research in appropriate renewable sources of energy;
(b) creating incentives for the promotion of renewable sources of
energy;
(c) promoting measures for the conservation of non-renewable sources
of energy; and
(d) taking measures to encourage the planting of trees and woodlots by
individual land users, institutions and by community groups.
50. Conservation of biological diversity
The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, prescribe
measures necessary to ensure the conservation of biological diversity in Kenya
and in this respect the Authority shall—
(a) identify, prepare and maintain an inventory of biological diversity of
Kenya;
(b) determine which components of biological diversity are endangered,
rare or threatened with extinction;
(c) identify potential threats to biological diversity and devise measures
to remove or arrest their effects;

-- 35 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 36
(d) undertake measures intended to integrate the conservation and
sustainable utilisation ethic in relation to biological diversity in
existing government activities and activities by private persons;
(e) specify national strategies, plans and government programmes for
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity;
(f) protect indigenous property rights of local communities in respect of
biological diversity; and
(g) measure the value of unexploited natural resources in terms of
watershed protection, influences on climate, cultural and aesthetic
value, as well as actual and potential genetic value thereof.
51. Conservation of biological resources in situ
The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, prescribe
measures adequate to ensure the conservation of biological resources in situ and
in this regard shall issue guidelines for—
(a) land use methods that are compatible with conservation of biological
diversity;
(b) the selection and management of protected areas so as to promote
the conservation of the various terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
under the jurisdiction of Kenya;
(c) selection and management of buffer zones near protected areas;
(d) special arrangements for the protection of species, ecosystems and
habitats threatened with extinction;
(e) prohibiting and controlling the introduction of alien species into
natural habitats; and
(f) integrating traditional knowledge for the conservation of biological
diversity with mainstream scientific knowledge.
52. Conservation of biological resources ex-situ
The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies—
(a) prescribe measures for the conservation of biological resources ex-
situ especially for those species threatened with extinction;
(b) issue guidelines for the management of—
(i) germplasm banks;
(ii) botanical gardens;
(iii) zoos or aquaria;
(iv) animal orphanages; and
(v) any other facilities recommended to the Authority by any of its
Committees or considered necessary by the Authority.
(c) ensure that species threatened with extinction which are conserved
ex-situ are re-introduced into their native habitats and ecosystems
where—
(i) the threat to the species has been terminated; or
(ii) a viable population of the threatened species has been
achieved.

-- 36 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
37 [Issue 1]
53. Access to genetic resources of Kenya
(1) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, issue
guidelines and prescribe measures for the sustainable management and
utilisation of genetic resources of Kenya for the benefit of the people of Kenya.
(2) Without prejudice to the general effect of subsection (1), the guidelines
issued or measures prescribed under that subsection shall specify—
(a) appropriate arrangements for access to genetic resources of Kenya
by non-citizens of Kenya including the issue of licences and fees to
be paid for that access;
(b) measures for regulating the import or export of germplasm;
(c) the sharing of benefits derived from genetic resources of Kenya;
(d) biosafety measures necessary to regulate biotechnology;
(e) measures necessary to regulate the development, access to and
transfer of biotechnology; and
(f) any other matter that the Authority considers necessary for the
better management of the genetic resources of Kenya.
54. Protection of environmentally significant areas
(1) The Minister may, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, by
notice in the Gazette, declare any area of land, sea, lake or river to be a
protected natural environment for the purpose of promoting and preserving
specific ecological processes, natural environment systems, natural beauty or
species of indigenous wildlife or the preservation of biological diversity in general.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), the Authority may, in consultation with
the relevant lead agencies, issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the
management and protection of any area of environmental significance declared
to be a protected natural environment area under this section.
55. Protection of the coastal zone
(1) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, declare an area to be a
protected Zone.
(2) As soon as practicable upon the commencement of this Act, the Authority
shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, prepare a survey of the
coastal zone and prepare an integrated national coastal zone management plan
based on the report of such survey.
(3) The Authority shall, from time to time, not exceeding every two years,
review the national coastal zone management plan prepared under subsection (2).
(4) The report of the survey of the coastal zone shall contain—
(a) an inventory of all structures, roads, excavations, harbours, outfalls,
dumping sites and other works located in the coastal zone;
(b) an inventory of the state of the coral reefs, mangroves and marshes
found within the coastal zone;

-- 37 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 38
(c) an inventory of all areas within the coastal zone of scenic value or of
value for recreational and cultural purposes;
(d) an inventory of areas within the coastal zone of special value for
research in respect of fisheries, erosion, littorals movement and
such other similar subjects;
(e) an estimate of the quantities of sand, coral sea shells and other
substances being removed from the coastal zone;
(f) an estimate of the impacts of erosion on the coastal zone; and
(g) an estimate of the extent, nature, cause and sources of coastal
pollution and degradation;
(h) an estimate of freshwater resources available in the coastal zone;
and
(i) any other relevant data or information that may be deemed
appropriate.
(5) Any person who releases or causes to be released into the coastal zone
any polluting or hazardous substances contrary to the provisions of this Act shall
be guilty of an offence and liable upon conviction to a fine of not less than one
million shillings or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years or to
both such fine and imprisonment.
(6) The Minister shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, issue
appropriate regulations to prevent, reduce and control pollution or other form of
environmental damage in the coastal zone.
(7) Notwithstanding the generality of subsection (6) of this section, the
regulations made thereunder shall provide for the control and prevention of
pollution—
(a) of the marine environment from land based sources including rivers,
estuaries, pipelines and outfall structures;
(b) from vessels, aircrafts and other engines used in the coastal zone;
(c) from installations and devices used in the exploration or exploitation
of the natural resources of the seabed and subsoil of the exclusive
economic zone; and
(d) of the marine environment arising from or in connection with seabed
activities and from artificial islands installations and other structures
in the exclusive economic zone.
56. Protection of the ozone layer
(1) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies,
undertake or commission other persons to undertake national studies and give
due recognition to developments in scientific knowledge relating to substances,
activities and practices that deplete the ozone layer to the detriment of public
health and the environment.
(2) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, issue
guidelines and institute programmes concerning the—
(a) elimination of substances that deplete the stratospheric ozone layer;

-- 38 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
39 [Issue 1]
(b) controlling of activities and practices likely to lead to the degradation
of the ozone layer and the stratosphere;
(c) reduction and minimisation of risks to human health created by the
degradation of the ozone layer and the stratosphere; and
(d) formulate strategies, prepare and evaluate programmes for phasing
out ozone depleting substances.
57. Fiscal incentives
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of any relevant revenue Act, the Minister
responsible for Finance may, on the recommendation of the Council, propose to
Government tax and other fiscal incentives, disincentives or fees to induce or
promote the proper management of the environment and natural resources or the
prevention or abatement of environmental degradation.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) the tax and fiscal
incentives, disincentives or fees may include—
(a) customs and excise waiver in respect of imported capital goods
which prevent or substantially reduce environmental degradation
caused by an undertaking;
(b) tax rebates to industries or other establishments that invest in
plants, equipment and machinery for pollution control, re-cycling of
wastes, water harvesting and conservation, prevention of floods and
for using other energy resources as substitutes for hydrocarbons;
(c) tax disincentives to deter bad environmental behaviour that leads to
depletion of environmental resources or that cause pollution; or
(d) user fees to ensure that those who use environmental resources
pay proper value for the utilization of such resources.
PART VI – ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
58. Application for an Environmental Impact Assessment Licence
(1) Notwithstanding any approval, permit or license granted under this Act or
any other law in force in Kenya, any person, being a proponent of a project, shall
before for an financing, commencing, proceeding with, carrying out, executing or
conducting or causing to be financed, commenced, proceeded with, carried out,
executed or conducted by another person any undertaking specified in the
Second Schedule to this Act, submit a project report to the Authority, in the
prescribed form, giving the prescribed information and which shall be
accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(2) The proponent of a project shall undertake or cause to be undertaken at
his own expense an environmental impact assessment study and prepare a
report thereof where the Authority, being satisfied, after studying the project
report submitted under subsection (1), that the intended project may or is likely to
have or will have a significant impact on the environment, so directs.
(3) The environmental impact assessment study report prepare under this
subsection shall be submitted to the Authority in the prescribed form, giving the
prescribed information and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee.

-- 39 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 40
(4) The Minister may, on the advice of the Authority given after consultation
with the relevant lead agencies, amend the Second Schedule to this Act by
notice in the Gazette.
(5) Environmental impact assessment studies and reports required under this
Act shall be conducted or prepared respectively by individual experts or a firm of
experts authorised in that behalf by the Authority. The Authority shall maintain a
register of all individual experts or firms of all experts duly authorized by it to
conduct or prepare environmental impact assessment studies and reports
respectively. The register shall be a public document and may be inspected at
reasonable hours by any person on the payment of a prescribed fee.
(6) The Director-General may, in consultation with the Standards
Enforcement and Review Committee, approve any application by an expert
wishing to be authorised to undertake environmental impact assessment. Such
application shall be made in the prescribed manner and accompanied by any
fees that may be required.
(7) Environmental impact assessment shall be conducted in accordance with
the environmental impact assessment regulations, guidelines and procedures
issued under this Act.
(8) The Director-General shall respond to the applications for environmental
impact assessment license within three months.
(9) Any person who upon submitting his application does not receive any
communication from the Director-General within the period stipulated under
subsection (8) may start his undertaking.
59. Publication of Environmental Impact Assessment
(1) Upon receipt of an environmental impact assessment study report from
any proponent under section 58(2), the Authority shall cause to be published for
two successive weeks in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area
or proposed area of the project a notice which shall state—
(a) a summary description of the project;
(b) the place where the project is to be carried out;
(c) the place where the environmental impact assessment study,
evaluation or review report may be inspected; and
(d) a time limit of not exceeding sixty days for the submission of oral or
written comments environmental impact assessment study,
evaluation or review report.
(2) The Authority may, on application by any person extend the period
stipulated in sub-paragraph (d) so as to afford reasonable opportunity for such
person to submit oral or written comments on the environmental impact
assessment report.
60. Comments on Environmental Impact Assessment report by Lead
Agencies
A lead agency shall, upon the written request of the Director-General, submit
written comments on an environmental impact assessment study, evaluation and
review report within thirty days from the date of the written request.

-- 40 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
41 [Issue 1]
61. Technical Advisory Committee on Environmental Impact Assessment
The Authority may set up a technical advisory committee to advise it on
environmental impact assessment related reports and the Director-General shall
prescribe the terms of reference and rules of procedure for the technical advisory
committee appointed hereunder.
62. Further Environmental Impact Assessment
The Authority may require any proponent of a project to carry out at his own
expense further evaluation or environmental impact assessment study, review or
submit additional information for the purposes of ensuring that the environmental
impact assessment study, review or evaluation report is as accurate and
exhaustive as possible.
63. Environmental Impact Licence
The Authority may, after being satisfied as to the adequacy of an
environmental impact assessment study, evaluation or review report, issue an
environmental impact assessment licence on such terms and conditions as may
be appropriate and necessary to facilitate sustainable development and sound
environmental management.
64. Submission of fresh Environmental Impact assessment report after
Environmental Impact Assessment License issued
(1) The Authority may, at any time after the issue of an environmental impact
assessment licence direct the holder of such licence to submit at his own
expense a fresh environmental impact assessment study, evaluation or review
report within such time as the Authority may specify where—
(a) there is a substantial change or modification in the project or in the
manner in which the project is being operated;
(b) the project poses environmental threat which could not be
reasonably foreseen at the time of the study, evaluation or review;
or
(c) it is established that the information or data given by the proponent
in support of his application for an environmental impact
assessment licence under section 58 was false, inaccurate or
intended to mislead.
(2) Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the directions of
the Authority issued under subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence.
65. Transfer of Environmental Impact Assessment Licence
(1) An environmental impact assessment licence may be transferred by the
holder to another person only in respect of the project in relation to which such
licence was issued.
(2) Where an environmental impact assessment licence is transferred under
this section, the person to whom it is transferred and the person transferring it
shall jointly notify the Director-General in writing of the transfer, not later than
thirty days after the transfer.

-- 41 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 42
(3) Where no joint notification of a transfer is given in accordance with
subsection (2), the registered holder of the licence shall be deemed for the
purposes of this Act to be the owner or the person having charge or management
or control of the project as the case may be.
(4) Any transfer of an environmental impact assessment licence, under this
section shall take effect on the date the Director-General is notified of the
transfer.
(5) Any person who contravenes any provisions of this section, shall be guilty
of an offence.
66. Protection in respect of an Environmental Impact Assessment Licence
(1) No civil or criminal liability in respect of a project or consequences
resulting from a project shall be incurred by the Government, the Authority or any
impact assessment study, evaluation or review report or grant of an
environmental impact assessment licence or by reason of any condition attached
to such licence.
(2) The issuance of an environmental impact assessment licence in respect
of a project shall afford no defence to any civil action or to a prosecution that may
be brought or preferred against a proponent in respect of the manner in which
the project is executed, managed or operated.
67. Revocation, suspension or cancellation of Environmental Impact
Assessment Licence
(1) The Authority shall, on the advice of the Standards and Enforcement
Review Committee, cancel, revoke or suspend any environment impact
assessment licence for such time not exceeding twenty four months where the
licensee contravenes the provisions of the licence.
(2) Whenever an environmental impact assessment licence is revoked,
suspended or cancelled, the holder thereof shall not proceed with the project
which is the subject of the licence until a new licence is issued by the Authority.
(3) The Authority shall maintain a register of all environmental impact
assessment licences issued under this Act. The register shall be a public
document and may be inspected at reasonable hours by any person on the
payment of a prescribed fee.
PART VII – ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT AND MONITORING
68. Environmental audit
(1) The Authority shall be responsible for carrying out environmental audit of
all activities that are likely to have significant effect on the environment.
(2) An environmental inspector appointed under this Act may enter any land
or premises for the purposes of determining how far the activities carried out on
that land or premises conform with the statements made in the environmental
impact assessment study report issued in respect of that land or those premises
under section 58(2).

-- 42 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
43 [Issue 1]
(3) The owner of the premises or the operator of a project for which an
environmental impact assessment study report has been made shall keep
accurate records and make annual reports to the Authority describing how far the
project conforms in operation with the statements made in the environmental
impact assessment study report submitted under section 58(2).
(4) The owner of premises or the operator of a project shall take all
reasonable measures to mitigate any undesirable effects not contemplated in the
environmental impact assessment study report submitted under section 58(2)
and shall prepare and submit an environmental audit report on those measures
to the Authority annually or as the Authority may, in writing, require.
69. Environmental monitoring
(1) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies,
monitor—
(a) all environmental phenomena with a view to making an assessment
of any possible changes in the environment and their possible
impacts; or
(b) the operation of any industry, project or activity with a view of
determining its immediate and long-term effects on the environment.
(2) An environmental inspector appointed under this Act may enter upon any
land or premises for the purposes of monitoring the effects upon the environment
of any activities carried on that land or premises.
PART VIII – ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY STANDARDS
70. Establishment of a Standards and Enforcement Review Committee
(1) There is hereby established a Standards and Enforcement Review
Committee to be a committee of the Authority.
(2) The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee shall consist of the
members set out in the Third Schedule to this Act.
(3) The permanent secretary under the Minister shall be the Chairman of the
Standards and Enforcement Review Committee.
(4) The Director-General shall appoint a Director of the Authority to be a
member of the Standards and Enforcement Review Committee who shall be the
secretary to the Committee and shall provide the secretarial services to the
Committee.
(5) The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee shall regulate its own
procedure.
(6) The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee may co-opt any
person to attend its meetings and a person so co-opted shall participate at the
deliberations of the Committee but shall have no vote.
(7) The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee shall meet at least
once every three months for the transaction of its business.

-- 43 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 44
71. Functions of Standards and Enforcement Review Committee
The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee shall, in consultation with
the relevant lead agencies—
(a) advise the Authority on how to establish criteria and procedures for
the measurement of water quality;
(b) recommend to the Authority minimum water quality standards for all
the waters of Kenya and for different uses, including—
(i) drinking water;
(ii) water for industrial purposes;
(iii) water for agricultural purposes;
(iv) water for recreational purposes;
(v) water for fisheries and wildlife;
(vi) and any other prescribed water use.
(c) analyse and submit to the Director-General conditions for discharge
of effluents into the environment;
(d) prepare and recommend to the Director-General guidelines or
regulations for the preservation of fishing area, aquatic areas, water
sources and reservoirs and other areas, where water may need
special protection;
(e) identify and recommend to the Authority areas of research on the
effects of water pollution on the environment, human beings, flora
and fauna;
(f) advise the Authority to carry out investigations of actual or
suspected water pollution including the collection of data;
(g) advise the Authority to take steps or authorise any works to be
carried out which appear to be necessary to prevent or abate water
pollution from natural causes or from abandoned works or
undertakings;
(h) document the analytical methods by which water quality and
pollution control standards can be determined and appoint
laboratories for the analytical services required or request the
Director-General to establish such laboratories;
(i) collect, maintain and interpret data from industries and local
authorities on the pre-treatment nature and levels of effluents;
(j) recommend to the Director-General measures necessary for the
treatment of effluents before being discharged into the sewerage
system;
(k) recommend to the Director-General works necessary for the
treatment for the treatment of effluents before being discharged into
the water;
(l) submit to the Director-General all such recommendations as may
appear necessary for the monitoring and control of water pollution.

-- 44 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
45 [Issue 1]
72. Water pollution prohibition
(1) Any person, who upon the coming into force of this Act, discharges or
applies any poison, toxic, noxious or obstructing matter, radioactive waste or
other pollutants or permits any person to dump or discharge such matter into the
aquatic environment in contravention of water pollution control standards
established under this Part shall be guilty of an offence and liable to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to a fine not exceeding one
million shillings or to both such imprisonment and fine.
(2) A person found guilty under subsection (1) shall, in addition to any
sentence or fine imposed on him—
(a) pay the cost of the removal of any poison, toxic, noxious or
obstructing matter, radioactive waste or other pollutants, including
the costs of restoration of the damaged environment, which may be
incurred by a Government agency or organ in that respect;
(b) pay third parties reparation, cost of restoration, restitution or
compensation as may be determined by a court of law on
application by such third parties.
73. Duty to supply plant information to the Authority
All owners or operators of irrigation project schemes, sewerage systems,
industrial production workshops or any other undertaking which may discharge
effluents or other pollutants shall within ninety days upon the coming into force of
this Act or as may be demanded from time to time by the Authority, submit on
demand, to the Authority accurate information about the quantity and quality of
such effluent or other pollutant.
74. Effluents to be discharged only into sewerage system
(1) Every owner or operator of a trade or industrial undertaking shall
discharge any effluents or other pollutants originating from the trade or industrial
undertaking only into existing sewerage systems and the relevant Local Authority
operating or supervising such sewerage system shall issue, at a prescribed fee,
the necessary licence for discharge.
(2) The proponent or owner of a trade or an industrial undertaking shall, prior
to being granted a licence to discharge effluents into the environment, install an
appropriate plant for the treatment of such effluents before they are discharged
into the environment.
75. Licence to discharge effluents
(1) No Local Authority operating a sewerage system or owner or operator of
any trade or industrial undertaking shall discharge any effluents or other
pollutants into the environment without an effluent discharge licence issued by
the Authority.
(2) Every owner or operator of a trade or an industrial undertaking
discharging any effluents or other pollutants into the environment before the
commencement of this Act shall, within twelve months of such commencement
apply to the Authority for an effluent discharge licence.

-- 45 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 46
(3) Every application for an effluent discharge licence shall be in the
prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(4) Before the issuance of a licence under subsections (1) and (2), the
Authority shall—
(a) solicit the comments of local authorities concerned and
organizations and persons as he may deem fit;
(b) take into consideration the possible effects of effluents or pollutants
to be discharged on the quality of an affected water course or other
source of water;
(c) take into consideration the existing licences affecting the concerned
water course or other source; and
(d) take into consideration the water requirements of riparian residents
and ecosystems, human settlements, and agricultural schemes
which depend on the affected water course.
(5) Where the Authority rejects an application for the grant of an effluent
discharge licence it shall within twenty one days notify the applicant of its
decision and state in writing its reasons for so rejecting the application.
(6) An effluent discharge licence issued under this Act shall be in a
prescribed form, be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed or as may
be specified in the licence and shall remain valid for such period and may be
renewed for such further periods as may be prescribed or specified in the
licence.
76. Cancellation of effluent discharge licence
(1) The Authority may in writing, cancel any effluent discharge licence—
(a) if the holder of the licence contravenes any provision of this Act or
any regulations made thereunder;
(b) if the holder fails to comply with any condition specified in the
licence; or
(c) if the Authority considers it in the interest of the environment or in
the public interest so to do.
77. Register of effluent discharge licences
The Authority shall maintain a register of all effluent discharge licences issued
under this Act. The register shall be a public document and may be inspected at
any reasonable hour by any person on the payment of the prescribed fee.
78. Air quality standards
(1) The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee shall, in consultation
with the relevant lead agencies—
(a) advise the Authority on how to establish criteria and procedures for
the measurement of air quality;
(b) recommend to the Authority—
(i) ambient air quality standards;
(ii) occupational air quality standards;

-- 46 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
47 [Issue 1]
(iii) emission standards for various sources;
(iv) criteria and guidelines for air pollution control for both mobile
and stationary sources;
(v) any other air quality standards.
(c) advise the Authority on measures necessary to reduce existing
sources of air pollution by requiring the redesign of plants or the
installation of new technology or both, to meet the requirements of
standards established under this section;
(d) recommend to the Authority guidelines to minimize emissions of
green house gases and identify suitable technologies to minimize air
pollution;
(e) advise the Authority on emissions concentration and nature of
pollutants emitted;
(f) recommend to the Authority the best practicable technology
available in controlling pollutants during the emission process;
(g) determine for consideration by the Authority the analytical methods
for monitoring air contaminants and recommend to the Director-
General the establishment of such number of laboratories for
analytical services as may be needed;
(h) request the Authority to carry out investigations of actual or
suspected air pollution including pollution produced by aircrafts and
other self propelled vehicles and by factories and power generating
stations;
(i) request the Authority to order any industry or other source of air
pollution to file such returns and provide such information as it may
require; and
(j) do all such things as appear necessary for the monitoring and
controlling of air pollution.
(2) Any person who emits any substances which cause air pollution in
contravention of emission standards established under this Part shall be guilty of
an offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years or to
a fine of not more than five hundred thousand shillings or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
(3) A person found guilty under subsection (2) shall, in addition to any
sentence or fine imposed on him—
(a) pay the cost of the removal of the pollution, including any costs
which may be incurred by any Government agency or organ in the
restoration of the environment damaged or destroyed as a result of
the emission; and
(b) the cost to third parties in the form of reparation, restoration,
restitution or compensation as may be determined by a competent
court upon application by such third parties.
79. Controlled areas
(1) The Minister, may on the advice of the Authority, by Gazette Notice,
declare any area to be a controlled area for the purposes of this Part.

-- 47 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 48
(2) The Minister may, on the advice of the Authority, in regulations, prescribe
the air emission standards in respect of any controlled areas.
80. Licensing emissions
(1) An owner or operator of a trade, industrial undertaking or an
establishment which after the commencement of this Act, is emitting a substance
or energy which is causing or is likely to cause air pollution shall apply to the
Authority for an emission licence.
(2) In the case of any trade, industrial undertaking or establishment existing
before the commencement of this Act, such application shall be made within
twelve months after this Act has come into operation.
(3) Every application for an emission licence shall be in the prescribed form
and be accompanied by the prescribed fee.
81. Issue of emission licence
(1) Before issuing a licence in respect of emissions, the Authority shall—
(a) consider the possible effects of the emissions on the quality of
ambient air;
(b) consider existing licences affecting the same air resource;
(c) give due regard to the requirements for the residents, human
settlements and other industrial and commercial activities;
(d) solicit the comments of relevant Local Authorities and concerned
organisations;
(e) where the information accompanying the application appears
inadequate, require the applicant to furnish further information
relating to the undertaking in question, its location, materials,
technology design or other appropriate matters;
(f) where it appears necessary to conduct an environmental impact
study, require the applicant to conduct an environmental impact
assessment study in respect of the undertaking in question in
accordance with the provisions of Part VI.
(2) An emission licence issued under this Act shall be in a prescribed form,
be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed or as may be specified in the
licence and shall remain valid for such period and may be renewed for such
periods as may be prescribed or specified in the licence.
(3) Where the Authority rejects an application for the grant of an emission
licence, it shall within twenty one days of its decision, notify the applicant in
writing of its reasons for such refusal.
82. Emissions by motor vehicles and other conveyances
No owner or operator of a motor-vehicle, train, ship, aircraft or other similar
conveyance shall—
(a) operate it in such a manner as to cause air pollution in contravention
of the established emission standards; or

-- 48 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
49 [Issue 1]
(b) import any machinery, equipment, device or similar thing that will
cause emissions into the ambient air in contravention of prescribed
emission standards.
83. Additional licensing procedures
The Authority may establish additional procedures for the application and
grant of any licence under this Act and impose such conditions as it may deem
appropriate.
84. Cancellation of emission licence
The Authority may, in writing, cancel any emission licence—
(a) if the holder of the licence contravenes any provisions of this Act or
of any regulations made under it;
(b) if the holder fails to comply with any condition specified in the
licence; or
(c) if the Authority considers it in the interest of the environment or in
the public interest so to do.
85. Register of emission of licences
The Authority shall maintain a register of all emission licences issued under
this Act. The register shall be a public document and may be inspected at
reasonable hours by any person on the payment of a prescribed fee.
86. Standards for waste
The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee shall, in consultation with
the relevant lead agencies, recommend to the Authority measures necessary
to—
(1) identify materials and processes that are dangerous to human
health and the environment;
(2) issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the management of the
materials and processes identified under subsection (1);
(3) prescribe standards for waste, their classification and analysis, and
formulate and advise on standards of disposal methods and means
for such wastes; or
(4) issue regulations for the handling, storage, transportation,
segregation and destruction of any waste.
87. Prohibition against dangerous handling and disposal of wastes
(1) No person shall discharge or dispose of any wastes, whether generated
within or outside Kenya, in such manner as to cause pollution to the environment
or ill health to any person.
(2) No person shall transport any waste other than—
(a) in accordance with a valid licence to transport wastes issued by the
Authority; and
(b) to a wastes disposal site established in accordance with a licence
issued by the Authority;

-- 49 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 50
(3) No person shall operate a wastes disposal site or plant without a licence
issued by the Authority.
(4) Every person whose activities generate wastes shall employ measures
essential to minimize wastes through treatment, reclamation and recycling.
(5) Any person who contravenes any provisions of this section shall be guilty
of an offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years or
to a fine of not more than one million shillings or to both such imprisonment and
fine.
88. Application for waste licence
(1) Any person intending to transport wastes within Kenya, operate a wastes
disposal site or plant or to generate hazardous waste, shall prior to transporting
the wastes, commencing with the operation of a wastes disposal site or plant or
generating hazardous wastes, as the case may be, apply to the Authority in
writing for the grant of an appropriate licence.
(2) A licence to operate a waste disposal site or plant may only be granted
subject to the payment of the appropriate fee and any other licence that may be
required by the relevant Local Authority.
(3) Where the Authority rejects an application made under this section, it shall
within twenty one days of its decision, notify the applicant of the decision
specifying the reasons therefor.
89. Licences for existing wastes disposal sites and plants
Any person who, at the commencement of this Act, owns or operates a waste
disposal site or plant or generated hazardous waste, shall apply to the Authority
for a licence under this part, within six months after the commencement of this
Act.
90. Court orders to cease operation
(1) The Authority may apply to a competent court for orders compelling any
person to immediately stop the generation, handling, transportation, storage or
disposal of any wastes where such generation, handling, transportation, storage
or disposal presents an imminent and substantial danger to public health, the
environment or natural resources.
91. Hazardous wastes
(1) The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee shall, in consultation
with the relevant lead agencies, recommend to the Authority standard criteria for
the classification of hazardous wastes with regard to determining—
(a) hazardous waste;
(b) corrosive waste;
(c) carcinogenic waste;
(d) flammable waste;
(e) persistent waste;
(f) toxic waste;
(g) explosive waste;

-- 50 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
51 [Issue 1]
(h) radioactive waste;
(i) wastes, reactive otherwise than as described in the foregoing
paragraphs of this subsection;
(j) any other category of waste the Authority may consider necessary.
(2) The Authority shall, on the recommendation of the Standards and
Enforcement Review Committee issue guidelines and regulations for the
management of each category of hazardous wastes determined under
subsection (1).
(3) No person shall import into Kenya any hazardous waste falling under any
category determined under subsection (1).
(4) No hazardous waste shall be exported to any country from Kenya without
a valid permit granted by the Authority and written consent given by a competent
authority of the receiving country.
(5) No hazardous waste shall be transported within or through Kenya without
a valid permit granted by the Authority.
(6) Any person who contravenes any provision of this section or who
withholds, falsifies or otherwise tampers with information relating to trafficking in
hazardous or other waste shall be guilty of an offence and liable to imprisonment
for a term of not less than two years or to a fine of not less than one million
shillings or to both such imprisonment and fine.
(7) A person found guilty under subsection (6) shall be responsible for the
removal of the waste from Kenya and for its safe disposal.
92. Regulations of toxic and hazardous materials etc.
(1) The Minister may, on the advise of the Authority make regulations
prescribing the procedure and criteria for—
(a) classification of toxic and hazardous chemicals and materials in
accordance with their toxicity and the hazard they present to the
human health and to the environment;
(b) registration of chemicals and materials;
(c) labelling of chemicals and materials;
(d) packaging for chemicals and materials;
(e) advertising of chemicals and materials;
(f) control of imports and exports of toxic and hazardous chemicals and
materials permitted to be so imported or exported;
(g) distribution, storage, transportation and handling of chemicals and
materials;
(h) monitoring of the effect of chemicals and their residue on human
health and the environment;
(i) disposal of expired and surplus chemicals and materials; and
(j) restriction and banning of toxic and hazardous substances and
energy.

-- 51 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 52
93. Prohibition of discharge of hazardous substances, chemicals and
materials or oil into the environment and spiller’s liability
(1) No person shall discharge any hazardous substance, chemical, oil or
mixture containing oil into any waters or any other segments of the environment
contrary to the provisions of this Act or any regulations thereunder.
(2) A person who discharges a hazardous substance, chemical, oil or a
mixture containing oil into any waters or other segments of the environment
contrary to subsection (1) commits an offence.
(3) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (2) shall, in addition to
any other sentence imposed by the court—
(a) pay the cost of the removal of the hazardous substance, chemical,
oil or a mixture containing oil including any costs which may be
incurred by any Government agency or organ in the restoration of
the environment damaged or destroyed as a result of the discharge;
and
(b) the costs of third parties in the form of reparation, restoration,
restitution or compensation as may be determined by a competent
court on application by such third parties.
(4) The owner or operator of a production or storage facility, motor vehicle or
vessel from which a discharge occurs contrary to this section shall mitigate the
impact of the discharge by—
(a) giving immediate notice of the discharge to the Authority and other
relevant Government officers;
(b) immediately beginning clean-up operations using the best available
clean-up methods;
(c) complying with such directions as the Authority may, from time to
time, prescribe.
(5) Where the owner or operator of a production or storage facility, motor
vehicle or vessel has refused, neglected and/or failed to take the mitigation
measures prescribed in subsection (4), the Authority may seize the production or
storage facility, motor vehicle or vessel.
(6) Where the owner or operator fails to take the necessary measures under
subsection (4) after the passage of a reasonable time not exceeding six months
in all the circumstances, the Authority may, upon an order of court, dispose of the
production or storage facility, motor vehicle or vessel to meet the costs of taking
the necessary measures under subsection (4) and other remedial and restoration
measures.
(7) The Court in convicting a person of an offence under this section shall take
into account the measures taken by that person to comply with subsection (4).
94. Standards of pesticides and toxic substances
The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee, in consultation with the
relevant lead agencies shall—
(a) prepare and submit to the Authority draft standards for the
concentration of pesticides residues in raw agricultural commodities,

-- 52 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
53 [Issue 1]
processed foods and animal feed, and
for the purposes of this paragraph raw agricultural commodities—
(i) include fresh or frozen fruit and vegetables in their raw state,
grains, nuts, eggs, raw milk, meat and other agricultural
produce;
(ii) do not include any agricultural produce or good which is
processed, fabricated or manufactured by cooking,
dehydrating, milling, or by any other similar means;
(b) establish, revisit, modify and submit to the Authority draft standards
to regulate the importation, exportation, manufacture, storage,
distribution, sale, use, packaging, transportation disposal and
advertisement of pesticides and toxic substances with the relevant
organisations;
(c) establish and submit to the Authority draft procedures for the
registration of pesticides and toxic substances;
(d) establish and submit to the Authority draft measures to ensure
proper labelling and packaging of pesticides and toxic substances;
(e) constantly review the use and efficacy of pesticides and toxic
substances and submit the findings of such review to the Authority;
(f) recommend to the Authority measures for monitoring the effects of
pesticides and toxic substances on the environment;
(g) recommend to the Authority measures for the establishment and
maintenance of laboratories to operate as standards laboratories for
pesticides and toxic substances;
(h) recommend to the Authority measures for the establishment of
enforcement procedures and regulations for the storage, packaging
and transportation of pesticides and toxic substances;
(i) constantly collect data from industries on the production, use and
health effects of pesticides and toxic substances and avail such data
to the Authority;
(j) keep up-to-date records and reports necessary for the proper
regulation of the administration of pesticides and toxic substances;
(k) do all other things as appear necessary for the monitoring and
control of pesticides and toxic substances.
95. Repealed by Act No. 17 of 2006, s. 117.
96. Repealed by Act No. 17 of 2006, s. 118.
97. Registration of pesticides and toxic substances
(1) The Authority may, upon application, register a pesticide or toxic
substance subject to such existing conditions and any other conditions that the
Authority may determine.
(2) Every pesticide or toxic substance shall be registered for ten years unless
some other period is specified by the Authority, and may be renewed for a like
period.

-- 53 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 54
(3) Where the Authority refuses to register any pesticide or toxic substance,
the notice of refusal shall state the reasons for such refusal.
98. Offences relating to pesticides and toxic substances
(1) No person shall—
(a) detach, alter or destroy any labelling on a pesticide or toxic
substance contrary to the provisions of this Act;
(b) change the composition of a pesticide or toxic substance, contrary
to the provisions of this Act; or
(c) use or dispose into the environment a pesticide or toxic substance in
contravention of the provisions of this Act.
(2) No person shall distribute, sell, offer for sale, hold for sale, import, deliver
for importation to, or receive from, deliver or offer to deliver to any other person
any unregistered pesticide or toxic substance.
(3) Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable upon conviction to a fine of not more than
one million shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years or
to both such fine and imprisonment.
99. Seizure of pesticides and toxic substances
(1) Any pesticide or toxic substance which the Authority reasonably suspects
to be the subject matter of an offence under this Act shall be liable to seizure by
the Authority.
(2) Whenever any pesticide or toxic substance is seized under subsection (1),
the Authority shall serve a notice of seizure on the owner of the pesticide or toxic
Substance as soon as practicable.
(3) Where any pesticide or toxic substance is seized under this section, the
pesticide or toxic substance shall be placed under the custody of the Authority.
(4) Any pesticide or toxic substance placed under the custody of the Authority
under subsection (3) shall be released, if after six months—
(a) no prosecution under the Act has been instituted with regard to the
pesticide or toxic substance;
(b) no person is convicted of an offence under this Act.
100. Regulations regarding registration of pesticides and toxic substances
The Minister shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, make
regulations prescribing the contents of any application and the conditions for the
registration of pesticides and toxic substances under this Act.
101. Standards for noise
The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee shall, in consultation with
the relevant lead agencies—
(a) recommend to the Authority minimum standards for emissions of
noise and vibration pollution into the environment as are necessary
to preserve and maintain public health and the environment;

-- 54 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
55 [Issue 1]
(b) establish and submit to the Authority criteria and procedures for the
measurement of noise and vibration pollution into the environment;
(c) establish and submit to the Authority criteria and procedures for the
measurement of subsonic vibrations;
(d) establish and submit to the Authority standards for the emission of
sub-sonic vibrations which are likely to have a significant impact on
the environment;
(e) recommend to the Authority guidelines for the minimisation of sub-
sonic vibrations, referred to in paragraph (d) from existing and future
sources;
(f) establish and submit to the Authority noise level and noise emission
standards applicable to construction sites, plants, machinery, motor
vehicles, aircraft including sonic bonus, industrial and commercial
activities;
(g) recommend to the Authority measures necessary to ensure the
abatement and control of noise from sources referred to in
paragraph (f);
(h) measure the levels of noise emanating from the sources referred to
in paragraph (f) details of which measurements shall be given to the
owner or occupier of the premises from which the measurement was
taken; and
(i) recommend to the Authority guidelines for the abatement of
unreasonable noise and vibration pollution emitted into the
environment from any source.
102. Noise in excess of established standards prohibited
Subject to the provisions of the Civil Aviation Act (Cap. 394), any person who
emits noise in excess of the noise emission standards established under this Part
commits an offence.
103. Exemptions in respect of noise standards
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 102, the Authority may on
request grant a temporary permit not exceeding three months, allowing emission
of noise in excess of established standards for such activities as fireworks,
demolitions, firing ranges and specific heavy industry on such terms and
conditions as the Authority may determine.
(2) Where an exemption has been granted under subsection, (1), workers
exposed to excessive levels of noise shall be adequately protected in
accordance with the directives issued by the Authority.
104. Repealed by Act No. 5 of 2007, s. 78.
105. Repealed by Act No. 5 of 2007, s. 79.
106. Repealed by Act No. 5 of 2007, s. 80.

-- 55 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 56
107. Standards for the control of noxious smells
The Authority shall, in accordance with the relevant lead agencies, establish—
(a) procedures for the measurement and determination of noxious
smells;
(b) minimum standards for the control of pollution of the environment by
noxious smells; or
(c) guidelines for measures leading to the abatement of noxious smells,
whether from human or from naturally occurring phenomena.
[Act No. 5 of 2007, s. 81, Act No. 6 of 2009, Sch.]
PART IX – ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION ORDERS,
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION ORDERS AND ENVIRONMENTAL
EASEMENTS
108. Issue of Environmental Restoration Orders
(1) Subject to any other provisions of this Act, the Authority may issue and
serve on any person in respect of any matter relating to the management of the
environment an order in this Part referred to as an environmental restoration
order.
(2) An environmental restoration order issued under subsection (1) or
section 111 shall be issued to—
(a) require the person on whom it is served to restore the environment
as near as it may be to the state in which it was before the taking of
the action which is the subject of the order;
(b) prevent the person on whom it is served from taking any action
which would or is reasonably likely to cause harm to the
environment;
(c) award compensation to be paid by the person on whom it is served
to other persons whose environment or livelihood has been harmed
by the action which is the subject of the order;
(d) levy a charge on the person on whom it is served which in the
opinion of the Authority represents a reasonable estimate of the
costs of any action taken by an authorised person or organisation to
restore the environment to the state in which it was before the taking
of the action which is the subject of the order.
(3) An environmental restoration order may contain such terms and
conditions and impose such obligations on the persons on whom it is served as
will, in the opinion of the Authority, enable the order to achieve all or any of the
purposes set out in subsection (2).
(4) Without prejudice to the general effect of the purposes set out in
subsection (2) an environmental restoration order may require a person on whom
it is served to—
(a) take such action as will prevent the commencement or continuation
or cause of pollution;

-- 56 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
57 [Issue 1]
(b) restore land, including the replacement of soil, the replanting of
trees and other flora and the restoration as far as may be, of
outstanding geological, archaeological or historical features of the
land or the area contiguous to the land or sea as may be specified in
the particular order;
(c) take such action to prevent the commencement or continuation or
cause of environmental hazard;
(d) cease to take any action which is causing or may contribute to
causing pollution or an environmental hazard;
(e) remove or alleviate any injury to land or the environment or to the
amenities of the area;
(f) prevent damage to the land or the environment, aquifers beneath
the land and flora and fauna in, on or under or about the land or sea
specified in the order or land or the environment contiguous to the
land or sea specified in the order;
(g) remove any waste or refuse deposited on the land or sea specified
in the order and dispose of the same in accordance with the
provisions of the order;
(h) pay any compensation specified in the order.
(5) In exercising the powers under this section, the Authority shall—
(a) be guided by the principles of good environmental management in
accordance with the provisions of this Act; and
(b) explain the right of appeal of the persons against whom the order is
issued to the Tribunal or if dissatisfied with the decision of the
Tribunal, to superior courts.
109. Contents of environmental restoration orders
(1) An environmental restoration order shall specify clearly and in a manner
which may be easily understood—
(a) the activity to which it relates;
(b) the person or persons to whom it is addressed;
(c) the time at which it comes into effect;
(d) the action which must be taken to remedy the harm to the
environment and the time, being not more than thirty days or such
further period as may be prescribed in the order within which the
action must be taken;
(e) the powers of the Authority to enter any land and undertake the
action specified in paragraph (d);
(f) the penalties which may be imposed if the action specified in
paragraph (d) is not undertaken;
(g) the right of the person served with an environmental restoration
order to appeal to the Tribunal against that order, except where the
order is issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, in which case
the right of appeal shall lie with superior courts.

-- 57 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 58
(2) An Environmental Inspector of the Authority may inspect or cause to be
inspected any activity to determine whether that activity is harmful to the
environment and may take into account the evidence obtained from that
inspection in any decision on whether or not to serve an environmental
restoration order.
(3) The Authority may seek and take into account any technical, professional
and scientific advice which it considers to be desirable for a satisfactory decision
to be made on an environmental restoration order.
(4) An environmental restoration order shall continue to apply to the activity in
respect of which it was served notwithstanding that it has been complied with.
(5) A person served with an environmental restoration order shall, subject to
the provisions of this Act, comply with all the terms and conditions of the order
that has been served on him.
(6) It shall not be necessary for the Authority or its Inspectors in exercising
the powers under subsection (2), to give any person conducting or involved in the
activity which is the subject of the inspection or residing or working on or
developing land on which the activity which is the subject of the inspection is
taking place, an opportunity of being heard by or making representations to the
person conducting the inspection.
110. Reconsideration of environmental restoration order
(1) At any time within twenty-one days after the service of an environmental
restoration order, a person upon whom the order has been served may, by giving
reasons in writing, request the Authority to re-consider that order.
(2) Where the Authority exercises the power under subsection (1), the
expenses necessarily incurred by it in the exercise of that power shall be a civil
debt recoverable summarily by it from the person referred to in subsection (1).
111. Issue of environmental restoration order by a court
(1) Without prejudice to the powers of the Authority under this Act, a court of
competent jurisdiction may, in proceedings brought by any person, issue an
environmental restoration order against a person who has harmed, is harming or
is reasonably likely to harm the environment.
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, it shall not be necessary for a plaintiff under
this under this section to show that he has a right or interest in the property,
environment or land alleged to have been or likely to be harmed.
112. Environmental easements and environmental conservation orders
(1) A court may, on an application made under this Part, grant an
environmental easement or an environmental conservation order subject to the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The object of an environmental easement is to further the principals of
environmental management set out in this Act by facilitating the conservation and
enhancement of the environment, in this Act referred to as the benefited
environment, through the imposition of one or more obligations in respect of the
use of land, in this Act referred to as the burdened land, being the land in the
vicinity of the benefited environment.

-- 58 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
59 [Issue 1]
(3) An environmental easement may be imposed on and shall thereafter
attach to the burdened land in perpetuity or for a term of years or for an
equivalent interest under customary law as the court may determine.
(4) Without prejudice to the general effect of subsection (2), an environmental
conservation order may be imposed on burdened land so as to—
(a) preserve flora and fauna;
(b) preserve the quality and flow of water in a dam, lake, river or
acquifer;
(c) preserve any outstanding geological, physiographical, ecological,
archeological or historical features of the burdened land;
(d) preserve scenic view;
(e) preserve open space;
(f) permit persons to walk in a defined path across the burdened land;
(g) preserve the natural contours and features of the burdened land;
(h) prevent or restrict the scope of any activity on the burdened land
which has as its object the mining and working of mineral
aggregates;
(i) prevent or restrict the scope of an agricultural activity on the
burdened land;
(j) create and maintain works on burdened land so as to limit or
prevent harm to the environment; or
(k) create or maintain migration corridors for wildlife.
(5) Where an environmental easement is imposed on burdened land on
which any person has at the time of the imposition of the easement, any existing
right or interest to the land and that environmental easement will restrict that right
or interest, there shall be paid to that person, by the applicant for the
environmental easement such compensation as may be determined in
accordance with section 116.
(6) An environmental easement may exist in gross; that is to say, the validity
and enforceability of the easement shall not be dependent on the existence of a
plot of land in the vicinity of the burdened land which can be benefited or, of a
person with an interest in that plot of land who can be benefited by the
environmental easement.
113. Application to court for environmental easement
(1) A person or a group of persons may make an application to the court for
the grant of one or more environmental easements.
(2) The court may impose such conditions on the grant of an environmental
easement as it considers to be best calculated to advance the object of an
environmental easement.
114. Enforcement of environmental easements
(1) Proceedings to enforce an environmental easement may be commenced
only by the person in whose name the environmental easement has been issued.

-- 59 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 60
(2) Proceedings to enforce an environmental easement may request the
court to—
(a) grant an environmental restoration order;
(b) grant any remedy available under the law relating to easements in
respect of land.
(3) The court shall have a discretion to adapt and adjust, so far as seems
necessary to it, the law and procedures relating to the enforcement of the
requirements of an environmental easement.
115. Registration of environmental easements
(1) Where an environmental easement is imposed on land, the title of which
is registered under a particular system of land registration, the environmental
easement shall be registered in accordance with the provisions of the Act
applicable to that particular system of registration for easements.
(2) Where an environmental easement is imposed on any land other than
land referred to in subsection (1), the District Environment Committee of the area
in which that land is situated shall register the environmental easement on a
register maintained for that purpose in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3) In addition to any matter which may be required by any law relating to the
registration of easements in respect of land, the registration of an environmental
easement shall include the name of the applicant for the environmental
easement as the person in whose name the environmental easement is
registered.
116. Compensation for environmental easements
(1) Any person who has a legal interest in the land which is the subject of an
environmental easement, shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, be
entitled to compensation commensurate with the lost value of the use of the land.
(2) A person described in subsection (1) may apply to the court that granted
the environmental easement for compensation stating the nature of his legal
interest in the burdened land and the compensation sought.
(3) The court may require the applicant for the environmental easement to
bear the cost of compensating the person described in subsection (1).
(4) The court may, if satisfied that the environmental easement sought is of
national importance, order that the Government compensates the person
described in subsection (1).
(5) The court in determining the compensation due under this section shall
take into account the relevant provisions of the Constitution and any other laws
relating to compulsory acquisition of land.
PART X – INSPECTION, ANALYSIS AND RECORDS
117. Appointment of Environmental Inspectors
(1) The Director-General shall, by Gazette Notice, appoint duly qualified
persons whether public officer or otherwise, whether by name or by title of office,
to be environmental inspectors of the Authority for such jurisdiction units as shall
be specified in the Gazette Notice appointing them.

-- 60 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
61 [Issue 1]
(2) An environmental inspector shall—
(a) monitor compliance with the environmental standards established
under this Act;
(b) monitor the activities of other sector-specific environmental
inspectorates;
(c) monitor the pattern of use of environmental resources;
(d) conduct environmental audits; and
(e) perform such other functions as may be required under this Act or
under the Gazette Notice appointing him.
(3) An environmental inspector may, in the performance of his duties under
this Act or any regulations made thereunder, at all reasonable times and without
a warrant—
(a) enter any land, premises, vessel, motor vehicle or ox-drawn trailer
and make examinations and enquiries to determine whether the
provisions of this Act are being complied with;
(b) require the production of, inspect, examine and copy licences,
registers, records and other documents relating to this Act or any
other law relating to the environment and the management of
natural resources;
(c) take samples of any articles and substances to which this Act
relates and, as may be prescribed, submit such samples for test and
analysis;
(d) carry out periodic inspections of all establishments and undertakings
within their respective jurisdictional limits which manufacture, produce
as by-products, import, export, store, sell, distribute or use any
substances that are likely to have significant impact on the
environment, to ensure that the provisions of this Act are complied with;
(e) seize any article, vessel, motor vehicle, plant, equipment, substance
or any other thing which he reasonably believes has been used in
the commission of an offence under this Act or the regulations made
thereunder;
(f) with the written approval of the Director-General order the
immediate closure of any manufacturing plant or other
establishment or undertaking which pollutes or is likely to pollute the
environment contrary to the provisions of this Act and to require the
owner or operator of such establishment or undertaking to
implement any remedial measures that the environmental inspector
may direct in the notice closing down the establishment or
undertaking. Any establishment or undertaking closed down under
this paragraph may resume its operations only with the written
approval of the Director-General;
(g) with the approval of the Director-General issue an improvement notice
requiring the owner or operator of any manufacturing plant, vessel,
motor vehicle or other establishment or undertaking to cease any
activities deleterious to the environment and to take appropriate
remedial measures, including the installation of new plant and
machinery if necessary, within such reasonable time as the Director-
General may determine;

-- 61 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 62
(h) with an arrest warrant and the assistance of a police officer, arrest
any person whom he reasonably believes has committed an offence
under this Act; and
(i) install any equipment on any land, premise, vessel or motor vehicle
for purposes of monitoring compliance with the provisions of this
Act, or the regulations made thereunder upon giving the owner or
occupier of the land three months written notice.
(4) In exercising his powers under this Act, the environmental inspector shall
suitably identify himself.
118. Environmental Inspector’s powers to prosecute
Subject to the Constitution and the directions and control of the Attorney-
General, an environmental inspector may, in any case in which he considers it
desirable so to do—
(a) institute and undertake criminal proceedings against any person
before a court of competent jurisdiction (other than a court martial)
in respect of any offence alleged to have been committed by that
person under this Act; and
(b) discontinue at any stage with the approval of the Attorney-General,
before judgment is delivered any such proceedings instituted or
undertaken by himself.
119. Procedures for laboratories analysis of samples
(1) The Director-General may, by Notice in the Gazette, designate such
number of laboratories as he may consider necessary, analytical or reference
laboratories for the purpose of this Act.
(2) A notice under subsection (1) shall state the specific functions of the
laboratory, local limits or subject matter which the laboratory shall serve and the
persons appointed as analysts in respect of that laboratory.
(3) The Authority shall, on the advice of the Standards Enforcement Review
Committee, prescribe the form and manner in which samples will be taken for
analysis.
120. Certificate of analysis and its effect
(1) A laboratory designated as an analytical or reference laboratory under
section 119 shall issue a certificate of analysis of any substance submitted to it
under this Act.
(2) The certificate of analysis shall state the methods of analysis followed and
shall be the analyst or the reference analyst, as the case may be.
(3) A certificate issued under subsection (1) and complying with subsection (2)
shall be sufficient evidence of the facts stated in the certificate for all purpose under
this Act.
(4) The results of any analysis made by the laboratory shall be open to
inspection by all interested parties.

-- 62 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
63 [Issue 1]
121. Records to be kept
(1) The Director-General shall, by notice in the Gazette, prescribe the
activities for which records shall be kept for the purposes of this Act, the contents
of such records and the manner in which they shall be kept.
(2) The records kept in accordance with subsection (1) of this section and
any other records available at the site of an establishment or undertaking shall be
made available at such reasonable time to any environmental inspector for the
purpose of—
(a) an environmental audit;
(b) environmental monitoring and evaluation;
(c) pollution control;
(d) inspection;
(e) any other purpose that may be prescribed by the Director-General
from time to time.
122. Transmission of records to the Authority
The records kept under section 121 shall be transmitted annually to the
Authority or its designated representative to be received not later than one month
after the end of each calendar year. The Authority shall keep all records
transmitted hereunder and may maintain their confidentiality if the applicable
circumstances so require.
123. Public Access to records transmitted to the Authority
(1) Subject to the provisions of section 122, any person may have access to
any records transmitted to the Authority under this Act.
(2) A person desiring access to such records referred to in subsection (1)
may on application to the Authority, be granted access to the said records on the
payment of a fee prescribed by the Authority.
PART XI – INTERNATIONAL TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND
AGREEMENTS
124. Conventions, agreements and treaties on environment
(1) Where Kenya is a party to an international treaty, convention or
agreement, whether bilateral or multilateral, concerning the management of the
environment, the Authority shall, subject to the direction and control of the
Council, in consultation with relevant lead agencies—
(a) initiate legislative proposals for consideration by the Attorney-
General, for purposes of giving effect to such treaty, convention or
agreement in Kenya or for enabling Kenya to perform her
obligations or exercise her rights under such treaty, convention or
agreement; and
(b) identify other appropriate measures necessary for the national
implementation of such treaty, convention or agreement.

-- 63 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 64
(2) The Authority shall, in relation to the formation of international treaties,
conventions or agreements on the environment, assist the relevant lead agencies
negotiating such treaties, conventions or agreements.
(3) The Authority shall keep a register of all international treaties, agreements
or conventions in the field of the environment to which Kenya is a party.
PART XII – NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL
125. Establishment of the National Environment Tribunal
(1) There is established a Tribunal to be known as the National Environment
Tribunal which shall consist of the following members—
(a) a chairman nominated by the Judicial Service Commission, who
shall be a person qualified for appointment as a judge of the High
Court of Kenya;
(b) an advocate of the High Court of Kenya nominated by the Law
Society of Kenya;
(c) a lawyer with professional qualifications in environmental law
appointed by the Minister; and
(d) two persons who have demonstrated exemplary academic
competence in the field of environmental management appointed by
the Minister.
(2) All appointments to the Tribunal shall be by name and by Gazette Notice
issued by the Minister.
(3) The members of the Tribunal shall be appointed at different times so that
the respective expiry dates of their terms of office shall fall at different times.
(4) The office of a member of the Tribunal shall become vacant—
(a) at the expiration of three years from the date of his appointment;
(b) if he accepts any office the holding of which, if he were not a
member of the Tribunal, would make him ineligible for appointment
to the office of a member of the Tribunal;
(c) if he is removed from membership of the Tribunal by the Minister for
failure to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from
infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for
misbehaviour; and
(d) if he resigns the office of member of the Tribunal.
126. Proceedings of the Tribunal
(1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the rules of evidence as set out in
Evidence Act (Cap. 80).
(2) The Tribunal shall, upon an appeal made to it in writing by any party or a
referral made to it by the Authority on any matter relating to this Act, inquire into
the matter and make an award, give directions, make orders or make decisions
thereon, and every award, direction, order or decision made shall be notified by
the Tribunal to the parties concerned, the Authority or any relevant committee
thereof, as the case may be.

-- 64 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
65 [Issue 1]
(3) The Tribunal shall sit at such times and in such places as it may appoint.
(4) The proceedings of the Tribunal shall be open to the public save where
the Tribunal, for good cause, otherwise directs.
(5) Except as expressly provided in this Act or any regulations made
thereunder, the Tribunal shall regulate its proceedings as it deems fit.
127. Awards of the Tribunal
(1) The Tribunal may—
(a) make such orders for the purposes of securing the attendance of
any person at any place where the Tribunal is sitting, discovery or
production of any document concerning a matter before the Tribunal
or the investigation of any contravention of this Act as it deems
necessary or expedient;
(b) take evidence on oath and may for that purpose administer oaths; or
(c) on its own motion summon and hear any person as witness.
(2) Any person who—
(a) fails to attend the Tribunal after having been required to do so under
subsection (1)(a);
(b) refuses to take oath or affirmation before the Tribunal or being a
public officer refuses to produce any article or document when
lawfully required to do so by the Tribunal;
(c) knowingly gives false evidence or information which he knows to be
misleading before the Tribunal; or
(d) at any sitting of the Tribunal—
(i) wilfully insults any member or officer of the Tribunal;
(ii) wilfully interrupts the proceedings or commits any contempt of
the Tribunal.
(e) fails or neglects to comply with a decision order, direction or notice
confirmed by the Tribunal,
commits an offence under this Act.
128. Quorum for determination by Tribunal
(1) For the purposes of hearing and determining any cause or matter under
this Act, the Chairman and two members of the Tribunal shall form a quorum.
(2) A member of the Tribunal who has a direct interest in any matter which is
the subject of the proceedings before the Tribunal shall not take part in those
proceedings.
129. Appeals to the Tribunal
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by—
(a) a refusal to grant a licence or to the transfer of his licence under this
Act or regulations made thereunder;
(b) the imposition of any condition, limitation or restriction on his licence
under this Act or regulations made thereunder;

-- 65 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 66
(c) the revocation, suspension or variation of his licence under this Act
or regulations made thereunder;
(d) the amount of money which he is required to pay as a fee under this
Act or regulations made thereunder;
(e) the imposition against him of an environmental restoration order or
environmental improvement order by the Authority under this Act or
regulations made thereunder,
may within sixty days after the occurrence of the event against which he is
dissatisfied, appeal to the Tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed by
the Tribunal.
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Act, where this Act empowers
the Director-General, the Authority or Committees of the Authority to make
decisions, such decisions may be subject to an appeal to the Tribunal in
accordance with such procedures as may be established by the Tribunal for that
purpose.
(3) Upon any appeal, the Tribunal may—
(a) confirm, set aside or vary the order or decision in question;
(b) exercise any of the powers which could have been exercised by the
Authority in the proceedings in connection with which the appeal is
brought; or
(c) make such other order, including an order for costs, as it may deem
just.
(4) Upon any appeal to the Tribunal under this section, the status quo of any
matter or activity, which is the subject of the appeal, shall be maintained until the
appeal is determined.
130. Appeals to the High Court
(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Tribunal may, within
thirty days of such decision or order, appeal against such decision or order to the
High Court.
(2) No decision or order of the Tribunal shall be enforced until the time for
lodging an appeal has expired or, where the appeal has been commenced, until
the appeal has been determined.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2), where the Director-
General is satisfied that immediate action must be taken to avert serious injuries
to the environment, the Director-General shall have the power to take such
reasonable action to stop, alleviate or reduce such injury, including the powers to
close down any undertaking, until the appeal is finalised or the time for appeal
has expired.
(4) Upon the hearing of an appeal under this section, the High Court may—
(a) confirm, set aside or vary the decision or order in question;
(b) remit the proceedings to the Tribunal with such instructions for
further consideration, report, proceedings or evidence as the court
may deem fit to give;

-- 66 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
67 [Issue 1]
(c) exercise any of the powers which could have been exercised by the
Tribunal in the proceedings in connection with which the appeal is
brought; or
(d) make such other order as it may deem just, including an order as to
costs of the appeal or of earlier proceedings in the matter before the
Tribunal.
(5) The decision of the High Court on any appeal under this section shall be
final.
131. Power to appoint Environment Assessors
The Chairman of the Tribunal may appoint any persons with special skills or
knowledge on environmental issues which are the subject matter of any
proceedings or inquiry before the Tribunal to act as assessors in an advisory
capacity in any case where it appears to the Tribunal that such special skills or
knowledge are required for proper determination of the matter.
132. Power to seek the directions of the Tribunal in complex matters, etc.
(1) When any matter to be determined by the Authority under this Act
appears to it to involve a point of law or to be of unusual importance or
complexity, it may, after giving notice to the concerned parties, refer the matter to
the Tribunal for direction.
(2) Where any matter has been referred to the Tribunal under subsection (1),
the Authority and the parties thereto shall be entitled to be heard by the Tribunal
before any decision is made in respect of such matter and may appear
personally or be represented by an Advocate.
(3) Any person who is a party to proceedings before the Tribunal may appear
in person or be represented by an Advocate before the Tribunal.
133. Immunity
(1) The Chairman or other members of the Tribunal shall not be liable to be
sued in a civil court for an act done or omitted to be done or ordered to be done
by them in the discharge of their duty as members of the Tribunal, whether or not
within the limits of their jurisdiction, provided they, at the time, in good faith,
believed themselves to have jurisdiction to do or order the act complained of; and
no offer of the Tribunal or other person bound to execute the lawful warrants,
orders or other process of the Tribunal shall be liable to be sued in any court for
the execution of a warrant, order or process which he would have been bound to
execute if within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
(2) It shall be an offence for any person to engage in acts or make omissions
amounting to contempt of the Tribunal and the Tribunal may punish such person
for contempt in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
134. Remuneration of members of Tribunal
There shall be paid to the Chairman and the members of the Tribunal such
remuneration and allowances as the Minister shall determine.

-- 67 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 68
135. Appointment of a Secretary to the Tribunal
The Minister shall appoint a public officer to be the secretary to the Tribunal
who shall be paid such allowances as the Minister shall determine.
136. Powers to establish other Tribunals
(1) The Ministry may establish such other Tribunals in any part of Kenya as
he deems appropriate.
(2) The provisions of section 126-135 shall apply mutatis mutandis to any
Tribunal established under subsection (1).
PART XIII – ENVIRONMENTAL OFFENCES
137. Offences relating to inspection
Any person who—
(a) hinders or obstructs an environmental inspector in the exercise of
his duties under this Act or regulations made thereunder;
(b) fails to comply with a lawful order or requirement made by an
environmental inspector in accordance with this Act or regulations
made thereunder;
(c) refuses an environmental inspector entry upon any land or into any
premises, vessel or motor vehicle which he is empowered to enter
under this Act or regulations made thereunder;
(d) impersonates an environmental inspector;
(e) refuses an environmental inspector access to records or documents
kept pursuant to the provisions of this Act or regulations made
thereunder;
(f) fails to state or wrongly states his name or address to an
environmental inspector in the cause of his duties under this Act or
regulations made thereunder;
(g) misleads or gives wrongful information to an environmental
inspector under this Act or regulations made thereunder;
(h) fails, neglects or refuses to carry out an improvement order issued
under this Act by an environmental inspector,
commits an offence and shall, on conviction be liable to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding twenty four months, or to a fine of not more than five hundred
thousand shillings, or both.
138. Offences relating to Environmental Impact Assessment
Any person who—
(a) fails to submit a project report contrary to the requirements of
section 58 of this Act;
(b) fails to prepare an environmental impact assessment report in
accordance with the requirements of this Act or regulations made
thereunder;

-- 68 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
69 [Issue 1]
(c) fraudulently makes false statements in an environmental impact
assessment report submitted under this Act or regulations made
thereunder,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding twenty four months or to a fine of not more than two million shillings or
to both such imprisonment and fine.
139. Offences relating to records
Any person who—
(a) fails to keep records required to be kept under this Act;
(b) fraudulently alters any records required to be kept under this Act;
(c) fraudulently makes false statements in any records required to be
kept under this Act;
commits an offence and is liable upon conviction to a fine of not more than five
hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not more than
eighteen months or to both such fine and imprisonment.
140. Offences relating to standards
Any person who—
(a) contravenes any environmental standard prescribed under this Act;
(b) contravenes any measure prescribed under this Act;
(c) uses the environment or natural resources in a wasteful and
destructive manner contrary to measures prescribed under this Act,
commits an offence and shall be liable upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
five hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not more than
twenty-four months or to both such fine and imprisonment.
141. Offences relating to hazardous wastes, materials, chemicals and
radioactive substances
Any person who—
(a) fails to manage any hazardous waste and materials in accordance
with this Act;
(b) imports any hazardous waste contrary to this Act;
(c) knowingly mislabels any waste, pesticide, chemical, toxic substance
or radioactive matter;
(d) fails to manage any chemical or radioactive substance in
accordance with this Act;
(e) aids or abets illegal trafficking in hazardous waste, chemicals, toxic
substances and pesticides or hazardous substances;
(f) disposes of any chemical contrary to this Act or hazardous waster
within Kenya;

-- 69 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 70
(g) withholds information or provides false information about the
management of hazardous wastes, chemicals or radioactive
substances,
commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine of not less than
one million shillings, or to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years, or
to both.
142. Offences relating to pollution
(1) Any person who—
(a) discharges any dangerous materials, substances, oil, oil mixtures
into land, water, air, or aquatic environment contrary to the
provisions of this Act;
(b) pollutes the environment contrary to the provisions of this Act;
(c) discharges any pollutant into the environment contrary to the
provisions of this Act,
commits an offence and shall on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding five
hundred thousand shillings.
(2) In addition to any sentence that the Court may impose upon a polluter
under subsection (1) of this Section, the Court may direct that person to—
(a) pay the full cost of cleaning up the polluted environment and of
removing the pollution;
(b) clean up the polluted environment and remove the effects of
pollution to the satisfaction of the Authority.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsections (1)(2) of this section,
the court may direct the polluter to meet the cost of the pollution to any third
parties through adequate compensation, restoration or restitution.
143. Offences relating to Environmental restoration orders, easements,
and conservation orders
Any person who—
(a) fails, neglects or refuses to comply with an environmental
restoration order made under this Act;
(b) fails, neglects or refuses to comply with an environmental easement,
issued under this Act;
(c) fails, neglects or refuses to comply with an environmental
conservation order made under this Act,
commits an offence and shall on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding twelve months, or to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand
shillings, or to both.
144. General penalty
Any person who commits an offence against any provision of this Act or of
regulations made thereunder for which no other penalty is specifically provided is
liable, upon conviction, to imprisonment for a term of not more than eighteen
months or to a fine of not more than three hundred and fifty thousand shillings or
to both such fine and imprisonment.

-- 70 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
71 [Issue 1]
145. Offences by bodies corporate, Partnerships, Principals and Employers
(1) When an offence against this Act, is committed by a body corporate, the
body corporate and every director or officer of the body corporate who had
knowledge of the commission of the offence and who did not exercise due
diligence, efficiency and economy to ensure compliance with this Act, shall be guilty
of an offence.
(2) Where an offence is committed under this Act by a partnership, every
partner or officer of the partnership who had knowledge of the commission of the
offence and who did not exercise due diligence, efficiency and economy to
ensure compliance with this Act, commits an offence.
(3) A person shall be personally liable for an offence against this Act, whether
committed by him on his own account or as an agent or servant of another person.
(4) An employer or principal shall be liable for an offence committed by an
employee or agent against this Act, unless the employer or principal proves that
the offence was committed against his express or standing directions.
146. Forfeiture, cancellation and other orders
(1) The Court before which a person is charged for an offence under this Act
or any regulations made thereunder may, in addition to any other order—
(a) upon the conviction of the accused; or
(b) if it is satisfied that an offence was committed notwithstanding that
no person has been convicted of the offence,
order that the substance, motor vehicle, equipment and appliance or other thing
by means whereof the offence concerned was committed or which was used in
the commission of the offence be forfeited to the State and be disposed of as the
court may direct.
(2) In making the order to forfeit under subsection (1) the Court may also
order that the cost of disposing of the substance, motor vehicle, equipment,
appliance or any other thing provided for in that subsection be borne by the
person convicted thereunder.
(3) The Court may further order that any licence, permit or any authorisation
given under this Act, and to which the offence relates, be cancelled.
(4) The Court may further issue an order requiring that a convicted person
restores at his own cost, the environment to as near as it may be to its original
state prior to the offence.
(5) The court may in addition issue an environmental restoration order
against the person convicted in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
PART XIV – REGULATIONS
147. Power to make regulations
(1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the Authority and upon
consultation with the relevant lead agencies, make regulations prescribing for
matters that are required or permitted by this Act to be prescribed or are necessary
or convenient to be prescribed for giving full effect to the provisions of this Act.

-- 71 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 72
(2) Regulations made under subsection (2) may—
(a) make provisions for the issue, amendment and revocation of any
licence;
(b) provide for the charging of fees and levying of charges;
(c) adopt wholly or in part or with modifications any rules, standards,
guidelines, regulations, by laws, codes, instructions, specifications,
or administrative procedures prescribed by any lead agency either in
force at the time of prescription or publication or as amended from
time to time.
148. Existing laws
Any written law, in force immediately before the coming into force of this Act,
relating to the management of the environment shall have effect subject to
modifications as may be necessary to give effect to this Act, and where the
provisions of any such law conflict with any provisions of this Act, the provisions
of this Act shall prevail.
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Sections 4 (1)(b), 29 (1)(c), (3)(b), 37 (1)(b)]
Agriculture.
Economic Planning and Development.
Education.
Energy.
Environment.
Finance.
Fisheries.
Foreign Affairs.
Health.
Industry.
Law or Law Enforcement.
Local Government.
Natural Resources.
Public Administration.
Public Works.
Research and Technology.
Tourism.
Water Resources.

-- 72 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
73 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Section 58(1), (4)]
PROJECTS TO UNDERGO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
1. General—
(a) an activity out of character with its surrounding;
(b) any structure of a scale not in keeping with its surrounding;
(c) major changes in land use.
2. Urban Development including—
(a) designation of new townships;
(b) establishment of industrial estates;
(c) establishment or expansion of recreational areas;
(d) establishment or expansion of recreational townships in mountain
areas, national parks and game reserves;
(e) shopping centres and complexes.
3. Transportation including—
(a) all major roads;
(b) all roads in scenic, wooded or mountainous areas and wetlands;
(c) railway lines;
(d) airports and airfields;
(e) oil and gas pipelines;
(f) water transport.
4. Dams, rivers and water resources including—
(a) storage dams, barrages and piers;
(b) river diversions and water transfer between catchments;
(c) flood control schemes;
(d) drilling for the purpose of utilising ground water resources including
geothermal energy.
5. Aerial spraying.
6. Mining, including quarrying and open-cast extraction of—
(a) precious metals;
(b) gemstones;
(c) metalliferous ores;
(d) coal;
(e) phosphates;
(f) limestone and dolomite;
(g) stone and slate;

-- 73 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 74
(h) aggregates, sand and gravel;
(i) clay;
(j) exploration for the production of petroleum in any form;
(k) extracting alluvial gold with use of mercury.
7. Forestry related activities including—
(a) timber harvesting;
(b) clearance of forest areas;
(c) reforestation and afforestation.
8. Agriculture including—
(a) large-scale agriculture;
(b) use of pesticide;
(c) introduction of new crops and animals;
(d) use of fertilizers;
(e) irrigation.
9. Processing and manufacturing industries including—
(a) mineral processing, reduction of ores and minerals;
(b) smelting and refining of ores and minerals;
(c) foundries;
(d) brick and earthware manufacture;
(e) cement works and lime processing;
(f) glass works;
(g) fertilizer manufacture or processing;
(h) explosive plants;
(i) oil refineries and petro-chemical works;
(j) tanning and dressing of hides and skins;
(k) abattoirs and meat-processing plants;
(l) chemical works and process plants;
(m) brewing and malting;
(n) bulk grain processing plants;
(o) fish-processing plants;
(p) pulp and paper mills;
(q) food-processing plants;
(r) plants for the manufacture of assembly of motor vehicles;
(s) plant for the construction or repair of aircraft or railway equipment;
(t) plants for the manufacture or assembly of motor vehicles;
(u) plants for the manufacture of tanks, reservoirs and sheet-metal
containers;

-- 74 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
75 [Issue 1]
(v) plants for the manufacture of coal briquettes;
(w) plant for manufacturing batteries.
10. Electrical infrastructure including—
(a) electricity generation stations;
(b) electrical transmission lines;
(c) electrical sub-stations;
(d) pumped storage-schemes.
11. Management of hydrocarbons including—
the storage of natural gas and combustible or explosive fuels.
12. Waste disposal including—
(a) sites for solid waste disposal;
(b) sites for hazardous waste disposal;
(c) sewage disposal works;
(d) works involving major atmospheric emissions;
(e) works emitting offensive odours.
13. Natural conservation areas including—
(a) creation of national parks, game reserves and buffer zones;
(b) establishment of wilderness areas;
(c) formulation or modification of forest management policies;
(d) formulation or modification of water catchment management
policies;
(e) policies for the management of ecosystems, especially by use of
fire;
(f) commercial exploitation of natural fauna and flora;
(g) introduction of alien species of fauna and flora into ecosystems.
14. Nuclear Reactors.
15. Major developments in biotechnology including the introduction and testing
of genetically modified organisms.
THIRD SCHEDULE
[Sections 37(1)(d), 70(2)]
Representatives of the Government Ministries responsible for the following
matters—
Agriculture;
Economic Planning and Development;
Education;

-- 75 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Issue 1] 76
Energy;
Environment;
Finance;
Fisheries;
Health;
Industry;
Law and Law Enforcement;
Local Government/Authority;
Natural Resources;
Public Administration;
Public Works;
Research and Technology;
Tourism;
Water Resources;
Lands and settlement;
Labour;
Information.
Representatives of the following institutions—
Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology;
Kenya Agricultural Research Institute;
Kenya Bureau of Standards;
Kenya Forestry Research Institute;
Kenya Marine Research Institute;
Kenya Medical Research Institute;
Kenya Wildlife Service;
Kenyatta University;
Moi University;
National Council of Sciences;
National Museums of Kenya;
University of Nairobi;
Radiation Protection Board;
Pesticides Products Control Board.

-- 76 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
77 [Issue 1]
NO. 8 OF 1999
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION
List of Subsidiary Legislation
Page
1. Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003 ........... 79
2. National Environmental Tribunal Procedure Rules, 2003 .......................... 121
3. Environmental (Prevention of Pollution in Coastal Zone and Other
Segments of the Environment) Regulations, 2003 .................................... 137
4. Environmental Management (Lake Naivasha Management Plan) Order,
2004 ........................................................................................................... 141
5. Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Water Quality)
Regulations, 2006 ...................................................................................... 149
6. Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Waste Management)
Regulations, 2006 ...................................................................................... 175
7. Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Fossil Fuel Emission
Control) Regulations, 2006 ........................................................................ 221
8. Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Conservation of Biological
Diversity and Resources, Access to Genetic Resources and Benefit
Sharing) Regulations, 2006 ........................................................................ 229
9. Environmental Management And Co-Ordination (Controlled Substances)
Regulations, 2007 ...................................................................................... 239
10. Environmental Management and Co-Ordination (Wetlands, River Banks,
Lake Shores and Sea Shore Management) Regulations, 2009 ................. 269
11. Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive
Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009......................................... 281

-- 77 of 302 --

-- 78 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
79 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL (IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND AUDIT) REGULATIONS, 2003
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Application.
4. Approval of environmental impact assessment.
5. Technical advisory committees.
6. Application for environmental impact assessment licence.
PART II – THE PROJECT REPORT
7. Preparation of project report.
8. Submission of project report.
9. Comments on project report.
10. Approval of project report.
PART III – THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY
11. Terms of reference.
12. Environmental impact assessment guidelines.
13. Approval of experts.
14. Registration of environmental impact assessment experts.
15. Deleted.
16. Environmental impact assessment study.
17. Public participation.
PART IV – THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
18. Contents of environmental impact assessment study report.
19. Submission of environmental impact study report.
20. Invitation of comments from lead agencies.
21. Submission of comments.
22. Public hearing.
23. Decision of the Authority.
24 Environmental impact assessment licence.
25. Variation of licence.
26. Transfer of licence.
27. Surrender of licence.
28. Cancellation of an environmental impact assessment licence.
29. Access to information.
30. Protection of proprietary information.

-- 79 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 80
PART V – ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT AND MONITORING
Regulation
31. Environmental audit study.
32. Compliance with standards.
33. Control auditing.
34. Self auditing.
35. Contents of an environmental audit.
36. The environmental audit report.
37. Post audit orders.
38. Inspections.
39. Audit petition by public.
40. Monitoring by the Authority and lead agencies.
41. The monitoring report.
PART VI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
42. Strategic environmental assessment.
43. Contents of strategic environmental impact report.
44. Regional and international issues.
45. Offences.
46 Appeal to Tribunal.
47. Registers.
48. Fees.
SCHEDULE
FIRST SCHEDULE FORMS
SECOND SCHEDULE – ISSUES TO BE CONSIDERED IN ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT ASSESSMENT
THIRD SCHEDULE – GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR CARRYING OUT AN
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY
FOURTH SCHEDULE – CRITERIA FOR ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT EXPERTS
FIFTH SCHEDULE – FEES

-- 80 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
81 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL (IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND AUDIT) REGULATIONS, 2003
[L.N. 101/2003, Corr. No. 40/2003, L.N. 133/2007, L.N. 30/2009.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit)
Regulations, 2003.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations unless the context otherwise requires—
“analysis” means the testing or examination of any matter, substance or process
for the purpose of determining its composition or qualities or its effect (whether
physical, chemical or biological) on any segment of the environment or examination of
emissions or recording of noise or sub-sonic vibrations to determine the level or other
characteristics of the noise or sub-sonic vibration or its effect on any segments of the
environment;
“Authority” means the National Environment Management Authority established
under section 7 of the Act;
“biological diversity” means the variability among living organisms from all
sources including terrestrial ecosystems, aquatic ecosystems and the ecological
complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity within species, among
species, and of ecosystems;
“chemical” means a chemical substance in any form whether by itself or in a
mixture or preparation, whether manufactured or derived from nature and includes
industrial chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers and drugs;
“Director-General” means the Director-General of the Authority appointed under
section 10 of the Act;
“District Environment Committee” means the District Environment Committee
appointed under section 29 of the Act;
“economic analysis” means the use of analytical methods which take into
account economic, socio-cultural, and environmental issues in an integrated manner in
the assessment of projects;
“environment” includes the physical factors of the surroundings of human beings
including land, water, atmosphere, climate, sound, odour, taste, the biological factors
of animals and plants and the social factor of aesthetics and includes both the natural
and the built environment;
“environmental audit study” means a systematic evaluation of activities and
processes of an ongoing project to determine how far these activities and programmes
conform with the approved environmental management plan of that specific project
and sound environmental management practices;
“environmental auditor” means an expert or firm of experts registered in
accordance with regulation 14;
“environmental control audit system” means a mechanism or procedure put in
place by a proponent or proprietor in consultation with the Authority to determine
compliance with environmental standards;

-- 81 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 82
“environmental impact assessment” means a systematic examination
conducted to determine whether or not a programme, activity or project will have any
adverse impacts on the environment;
“environmental impact assessment expert” means an individual expert or firm
of experts registered under regulation 14 and includes a lead expert and an associate
expert;
“environmental impact assessment study report” means the report produced at
the end of the environmental impact assessment study process under section 58 and
regulation 11;
“environmental management” includes the protection, conservation and
sustainable use of the various elements or components of the environment;
“environmental management plan” means all details of project activities,
impacts, mitigation measures, time schedule, costs, responsibilities and commitments
proposed to minimize environmental impacts of activities, including monitoring and
environmental audits during implementation and decommissioning phases of a project;
“environmental monitoring” means the continuous or periodic determination of
actual and potential effects of any activity or phenomenon of the environment whether
short-term or long-term;
“guidelines” means the guidelines describing the methodology for implementation
of environmental impact assessment requirements adopted by the Authority under
section 58;
“inspector” means an environmental inspector appointed under section 117 of the
Act;
“lead agency” means any Government Ministry, department, parastatal, State
corporation or local authority, in which any law vests functions of control or
management of any element of the environment or natural resources;
“mass media” includes publicly exhibited posters, newspapers, radio, television or
other media used for public communication;
“mitigation measures” include engineering works, technological improvements,
management and ways and means of minimising negative aspects, which may include
socio-economic and cultural losses suffered by communities and individuals, whilst
enhancing positive aspects of the project;
“natural resources” include resources of air, land, water, animals and plants
including their aesthetic qualities;
“premises” include mesuages, buildings, lands and hereditaments in every tenure
and machinery, plant or vehicle used in connection with any trade carried on at any
premises;
“project” includes any project, programme or policy that leads to activities which
may have an impact on the environment;
“project report” means a summary statement of the likely environmental effects of
a proposed development referred to in section 58 of the Act;
“proprietary information” means information relating to any manufacturing
process, trade secret, trade mark, copyright, patent or formula protected by law in
Kenya or by any international treaty to which Kenya is a party;
“proponent” means a person proposing or executing a project, programme or an
undertaking specified in the Second Schedule of the Act;
“Provincial Environment Committee” means the Provincial Environment
Committee appointed under section 29 of the Act;

-- 82 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
83 [Issue 1]
“review” means a process of checking the adequacy of an environmental impact
study to ensure that it meets the legal requirement and ensure wide acceptance of the
environmental impact study findings;
“social analysis” means assessing or estimating in advance the social
consequences from specific policy actions or project development including social
justice and equity, social uncertainty, social cohesion, social networks and interactions,
social status and gender desegregation;
“standard” means the limits of discharge or emissions established under the Act
or under these Regulations;
“strategic environment assessment” means the process of subjecting public
policy, programmes and plans to tests for compliance with sound environmental
management;
“sustainable development” means development that meets the needs of the
present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
needs by maintaining the carrying capacity of the supporting ecosystem;
“sustainable use” means present use of the environment or natural resources,
which does not compromise the ability to use the same by future generations or
degrade the carrying capacity of supporting ecosystems;
“Standards and Enforcement Review Committee” means the Standards and
Enforcement Review Committee established under section 70 of the Act;
“Technical Advisory Committee” means the Technical Advisory Committee on
environmental impact assessment established under section 61 of the Act and
regulation 5 of these Regulations;
“trans-boundary impacts” means impacts beyond the Kenyan borders;
“Tribunal” means the National Environment Tribunal established under section
125 of the Act;
“waste” includes any matter prescribed to waste and any matter whether liquid,
solid, gaseous or radioactive, which is discharged, emitted or deposited in the
environment in such volume composition or manner likely to cause an alteration of the
environment;
“water” includes drinking water, river, stream, watercourse, reservoir, well, dam,
canal, channel, lake, swamp, open drain, or underground water.
3. Application
These Regulations shall apply to all policies, plans, programmes, projects and
activities specified in Part IV, Part V and the Second Schedule of the Act.
[Corr. No. 40/2003.]
4. Approval of environmental impact assessment
(1) No proponent shall implement a project—
(a) likely to have a negative environmental impact; or
(b) for which an environmental impact assessment is required under the Act or
these Regulations,
unless an environmental impact assessment has been concluded and approved in
accordance with these Regulations.
(2) No licensing authority under any law in force in Kenya shall issue a licence for any
project for which an environmental impact assessment is required under the Act unless
the applicant produces to the licensing authority a licence of environmental impact
assessment issued by the Authority under these Regulations.

-- 83 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 84
(3) No licensing authority under any law in force in Kenya shall issue a trading,
commercial or development permit or license for any micro project activity likely to have
cumulative significant negative environmental impact before it ensures that a strategic
environmental plan encompassing mitigation measures and approved by the Authority is
in place.
(4) If the Authority determines that an application for an environmental impact
assessment raises issues that concern more than one district, it shall submit the
application to the relevant Provincial Environment Committee.
5. Technical advisory committees
(1) The Authority may set up technical advisory committees at national, provincial and
district levels to advise it on environmental impact assessment related reports.
(2) A technical advisory committee set up under this Regulation shall consist of not
less than five multi-disciplinary specialists and such other persons as shall be indicated in
the guidelines.
(3) The terms of reference and rules of procedure of a technical advisory committee
shall be drawn by the Authority in accordance with section 61 of the Act.
(4) The Committees may, with the approval of the Director-General, co-opt any
persons it deems necessary for its proper functioning.
6. Application for environmental impact assessment licence
An application for an environmental impact assessment licence shall be in the form of
a project report in Form 1 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations, and the
applicant shall submit the application together with the prescribed fee to the Authority or
the Authority’s appointed agent in the District where the project is to be undertaken.
PART II – THE PROJECT REPORT
7. Preparation of project report
(1) A proponent shall prepare a project report stating—
(a) the nature of the project;
(b) the location of the project including the physical area that may be affected
by the project’s activities;
(c) the activities that shall be undertaken during the project construction,
operation and decommissioning phases;
(d) the design of the project;
(e) the materials to be used, products and by-products, including waste to be
generated by the project and the methods of their disposal;
(f) the potential environmental impacts of the project and the mitigation
measures to be taken during and after implementation of the project;
(g) an action plan for the prevention and management of possible accidents
during the project cycle;
(h) a plan to ensure the health and safety of the workers and neighbouring
communities;
(i) the economic and socio-cultural impacts to the local community and the
nation in general;
(j) the project budget; and
(k) any other information the Authority may require.

-- 84 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
85 [Issue 1]
(2) In preparing a project report under this Regulation, the proponent shall pay
particular attention to the issues specified in the Second Schedule to these Regulations.
(3) A project report shall be prepared by an environmental impact assessment expert
registered as such under these Regulations.
8. Submission of project report
A proponent shall submit at least two copies of the project report to the Authority or the
Authority’s appointed agent in the prescribed form accompanied by the prescribed fees.
[L.N. 133/2007, s. 2.]
9. Comments on project report
(1) Where the project report conforms to the requirements of regulation 7(1), the
Authority shall within seven days upon receipt of the project report, submit a copy of the
project report to—
(a) each of the relevant lead agencies;
(b) the relevant District Environment Committee; and
(c) where more than one district is involved, to the relevant Provincial
Environment Committee,
for their written comments which comments shall be submitted to the Authority within
twenty one days from the date of receipt of the project report from the Authority, or such
other period as the Authority may prescribe.
(2) On receipt of the comments referred to in subparagraph (1) or where no comments
have been received by the end of the period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the
project report, the Authority shall proceed to determine the project report.
10. Approval of project report
(1) On determination of the project report, the decision of the Authority, together with
the reasons thereof, shall be communicated to the proponent within forty-five days of the
submission of the project report.
(2) Where the Authority is satisfied that the project will have no significant impact on
the environment, or that the project report discloses sufficient mitigation measures, the
Authority may issue a licence in Form 3 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(3) If the Authority finds that the project will have a significant impact on the
environment, and the project report discloses no sufficient mitigation measures, the
Authority shall require that the proponent undertake an environmental impact assessment
study in accordance with these Regulations.
(4) A proponent who is dissatisfied with the Authority’s decision that an environmental
impact assessment study is required may within fourteen days of the Authority’s decision
appeal against the decision to the Tribunal in accordance with regulation 46.
PART III – THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY
11. Terms of reference
(1) An environmental impact assessment study shall be conducted in accordance with
terms of reference developed during the scoping exercise by the proponent and approved
by the Authority.
(2) The terms of reference shall include matters required to be considered in the
making of an environmental impact assessment as may be contained in the Second
Schedule to these Regulations and such other matters as the Director-General may in
writing require.

-- 85 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 86
12. Environmental impact assessment guidelines
(1) An environmental impact assessment study shall be conducted in accordance with
the general environmental impact assessment guidelines and sector environmental impact
assessment guidelines set out in the Third Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) Sector environmental impact assessment guidelines shall be developed by the
lead agency in consultation with the Authority.
13. Approval of experts
(1) A proponent shall, on the approval of the terms of reference under regulation 11,
submit to the Authority the names and qualifications of the impact assessment experts
appointed to undertake the environmental impact assessment study and authorized so to
do in accordance with section 58(5) of the Act.
(2) Every environmental impact assessment study shall be carried out by a lead
expert qualified in accordance with the criteria of listing of experts specified in the Fourth
Schedule to these Regulations.
(3) A person undertaking an environmental impact assessment study shall conduct
themselves in accordance with an established code of practice issued by the Authority.
14. Registration of environmental impact assessment experts
(1) A person or firm wishing to apply for registration as an environmental impact
assessment expert or firm of experts for carrying out environmental impact assessment
studies or audits shall be required to meet the qualification criteria set out in the Fourth
Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) An applicant for registration under subparagraph (1) shall submit an application in
Form 4 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations, accompanied by the prescribed
fees.
(3) An environmental impact assessment expert practising under a firm of experts
shall be registered as an individual expert.
(4) The Authority shall issue a certificate of registration to a qualified environmental
impact assessment expert in Form 5 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(5) An environmental impact assessment expert registered as such under these
Regulations may be de-registered if the expert contravenes any of provisions of the code
of practice issued by the Authority.
15. Deleted by L.N. 133/2007, s. 3.
16. Environmental impact assessment study
An environmental impact assessment study prepared under these Regulations shall
take into account environmental, social, cultural, economic, and legal considerations, and
shall—
(a) identify the anticipated environmental impacts of the project and the scale of
the impacts;
(b) identify and analyze alternatives to the proposed project;
(c) propose mitigation measures to be taken during and after the
implementation of the project; and
(d) develop an environmental management plan with mechanisms for
monitoring and evaluating the compliance and environmental performance
which shall include the cost of mitigation measures and the time frame of
implementing the measures.

-- 86 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
87 [Issue 1]
17. Public participation
(1) During the process of conducting an environmental impact assessment study
under these Regulations, the proponent shall in consultation with the Authority, seek the
views of persons who may be affected by the project.
(2) In seeking the views of the public, after the approval of the project report by the
Authority, the proponent shall—
(a) publicize the project and its anticipated effects and benefits by—
(i) posting posters in strategic public places in the vicinity of the site of
the proposed project informing the affected parties and communities
of the proposed project;
(ii) publishing a notice on the proposed project for two successive weeks
in a newspaper that has a nationwide circulation; and
(iii) making an announcement of the notice in both official and local
languages in a radio with a nationwide coverage for at least once a
week for two consecutive weeks;
(b) hold at least three public meetings with the affected parties and
communities to explain the project and its effects, and to receive their oral
or written comments;
(c) ensure that appropriate notices are sent out at least one week prior to the
meetings and that the venue and times of the meetings are convenient for
the affected communities and the other concerned parties; and
(d) ensure, in consultation with the Authority that a suitably qualified co-
ordinator is appointed to receive and record both oral and written comments
and any translations thereof received during all public meetings for onward
transmission to the Authority.
PART IV – THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
18. Contents of environmental impact assessment study report
(1) A proponent shall submit to the Authority, an environmental impact assessment
study report incorporating but not limited to the following information—
(a) the proposed location of the project;
(b) a concise description of the national environmental legislative and
regulatory framework, baseline information and any other relevant
information related to the project;
(c) the objectives of the project;
(d) the technology, procedures and processes to be used, in the
implementation of the project;
(e) the materials to be used in the construction and implementation of the
project;
(f) the products, by-products and waste generated by the project;
(g) a description of the potentially affected environment;
(h) the environmental effects of the project including the social and cultural
effects and the direct, indirect, cumulative, irreversible, short-term and long-
term effects anticipated;
(i) alternative technologies and processes available and reasons for preferring
the chosen technology and processes;
(j) analysis of alternatives including project site, design and technologies and
reasons for preferring the proposed site, design and technologies;

-- 87 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 88
(k) an environmental management plan proposing the measures for
eliminating, minimizing or mitigating adverse impacts on the environment;
including the cost, time frame and responsibility to implement the measures;
(l) provision of an action plan for the prevention and management of
foreseeable accidents and hazardous activities in the cause of carrying out
activities or major industrial and other development projects;
(m) the measures to prevent health hazards and to ensure security in the
working environment for the employees and for the management of
emergencies;
(n) an identification of gaps in knowledge and uncertainties which were
encountered in compiling the information;
(o) an economic and social analysis of the project;
(p) an indication of whether the environment of any other state is likely to be
affected and the available alternatives and mitigating measures; and
(q) such other matters as the Authority may require.
(2) The environmental impact assessment study report shall be accompanied by a
non-technical summary outlining the key findings, conclusions and recommendations of
the study and shall be signed by the proponent and environmental impact assessment
experts involved in its preparation.
19. Submission of environmental impact assessment study report
A proponent shall submit ten copies and an electronic copy of an environmental impact
assessment study report to the Authority in Form 1B set out in the First Schedule to these
Regulations accompanied by the prescribed fees.
20. Invitation of comments from lead agencies
(1) The Authority shall within fourteen days of the receipt of the environmental impact
assessment study report, submit a copy of the report to any relevant lead agencies for
their comments.
(2) Upon receiving the environmental impact assessment study report, the lead
agencies shall review the report to ensure that it complies with the terms of reference
developed under regulation 11 and that it is comprehensive and shall thereafter send their
comments on the study report to the Authority within thirty days or such extended period
as the Authority may specify.
(3) If the lead agencies to which a copy of the environmental impact assessment
study report is submitted fail to submit their comments within thirty days or such extended
period as the Authority may specify, the Authority may proceed with the determination of
the application for the implementation of the project.
21. Submission of comments
(1) The Authority shall, within fourteen days of receiving the environmental impact
assessment study report, invite the public to make oral or written comments on the report.
(2) The Authority shall, at the expense of the proponent—
(a) publish for two successive weeks in the Gazette and in a newspaper with a
nation-wide circulation and in particular with a wide circulation in the area of
the proposed project, a public notice once a week inviting the public to
submit oral or written comments on the environmental impact assessment
study report; and

-- 88 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
89 [Issue 1]
(b) make an announcement of the notice in both official and local languages at
least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a radio with a nation-wide
coverage.
(3) The invitation for public comments under this Regulation shall state—
(a) the nature of the project;
(b) the location of the project;
(c) the anticipated impacts of the project and the proposed mitigation measures
to respond to the impacts;
(d) the times and place where the full report can be inspected; and
(e) the period within which the Authority shall receive comments.
(4) The notice to be published in the newspaper as specified under subregulation (3)
shall be in Form 8 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
22. Public hearing
(1) Upon receipt of both oral and written comments as specified by section 59 and
section 60 of the Act, the Authority may hold a public hearing.
(2) A public hearing under these Regulations shall be presided over by a suitably
qualified person appointed by the Authority.
(3) The date and venue of the public hearing shall be publicized at least one week
prior to the meeting—
(a) by notice in at least one daily newspaper of national circulation and one
newspaper of local circulation;
(b) by at least two announcements in the local language of the community and
the national language through radio with a nation-wide coverage.
(4) The public hearing shall be conducted at a venue convenient and accessible to
people who are likely to be affected by the project.
(5) A proponent shall be given an opportunity to make a presentation and to respond
to presentations made at the public hearing.
(6) The presiding officer shall in consultation with the Authority determine the rules of
procedure at the public hearing.
(7) On the conclusion of the hearing, the presiding officer shall compile a report of the
views presented at the public hearing and submit the report to the Director-General within
fourteen days from the date of the public hearing.
23. Decision of the Authority
(1) The Authority shall give its decision on an environmental impact assessment study
report within three months of receiving an environmental impact assessment study report.
(2) The decision of the Authority shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons
thereof.
(3) In making a decision regarding an environmental impact assessment licence under
these Regulations, the Authority shall take into account—
(a) the validity of the environmental impact assessment study report submitted
under regulation 18 with emphasis on the economic, social and cultural
impacts of the project;
(b) the comments made by a lead agency and other interested parties under
these Regulations;

-- 89 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 90
(c) the report of the presiding officer compiled after a public hearing specified
under regulation 22 where applicable; and
(d) other factors which the Authority may consider crucial in the implementation
of the project.
(4) The decision of the Authority under this Regulation shall be communicated to the
proponent within fourteen days from the date of the decision and a copy thereof shall be
made available for inspection at the Authority’s offices.
24. Environmental impact assessment licence
Where the Authority approves an environmental impact assessment study report under
regulation 23, it shall issue an environmental impact assessment licence in Form 3 set out
in the First Schedule to these Regulations on such terms and conditions as it may deem
necessary.
25. Variation of licence
(1) Where a proponent wishes to vary the terms and conditions on which an
environmental impact assessment licence has been issued, the holder of the licence may
apply for a variation of the environmental impact assessment licence in Form 9 set out in
the First Schedule to these Regulations accompanied by the prescribed fees.
(2) The Authority may issue a certificate of variation of an environmental impact
assessment licence in Form 10 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(3) A variation of an environmental impact assessment licence issued under
regulation 24 may be issued without the holder of the licence submitting a fresh
environmental impact assessment study report if the Authority is satisfied that the project if
varied would comply with the requirements of the original licence.
(4) Where an environmental impact assessment is required under this Regulation, the
provisions of Part II of these Regulations shall apply.
[Corr. No. 40/2003.]
26. Transfer of licence
(1) The holder of an environmental impact assessment licence may, on payment of
the prescribed fee, transfer the licence to another person only in respect of the project to
which such licence was issued.
(2) The transferee as well as the transferor of a licence under this Regulation shall be
liable for all liabilities, and the observance of all obligations imposed by the transfer in
respect of the licence transferred, but the transferor shall not be responsible for any future
liabilities or any obligations so imposed with regard to the licence from the date the
transfer is approved.
(3) Where an environmental impact assessment licence is to be transferred, the
person to whom it is to be transferred and the person transferring it shall jointly notify the
Director General of the transfer in Form 11 set out in the First Schedule to these
Regulations.
(4) The Authority shall issue a certificate of transfer of an environmental impact
assessment licence in Form 12 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(5) Where no joint notification of a transfer is given in accordance with this Regulation,
the registered holder of the licence shall be deemed for the purposes of these Regulations
and the Act to be the owner or the person having charge, management or control of the
project as the case may be.

-- 90 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
91 [Issue 1]
27. Surrender of licence
(1) The holder of an environmental impact assessment licence may surrender the
licence issued under these Regulations to the Authority after ceasing to be responsible for
the implementation of the project.
(2) The holder of the licence shall notify the Authority of the intention to surrender the
licence under subregulation (1) at least six months before the surrender by submitting a
notification in Form 13 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations together with the
prescribed fees.
(3) The holder of a licence shall not surrender their licence without the consent of the
Authority.
(4) The surrender of an environmental impact assessment licence shall not be
effective until the Authority issues a certificate of surrender in respect of that licence in
Form 14 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(5) A surrender shall be without prejudice to any liabilities or obligations which have
accrued on the holder of the licence prior to the date of surrender.
28. Cancellation of an environmental impact assessment licence
(1) The Authority may, at any time after it issues a licence under these Regulations,
on the advice of the Standards Enforcement and Review Committee—
(a) suspend the licence on such terms and conditions as the Authority may
deem fit for a period not exceeding twenty-four months; or
(b) revoke or cancel the licence.
(2) The Authority may suspend, revoke or cancel a licence as specified under
subregulation (1) where—
(a) the licensee contravenes the conditions set out in the licence;
(b) there is a substantial change or modification in the project or in the manner
in which the project is being implemented;
(c) the project poses an environmental threat which could not be reasonably
foreseen before the licence was issued; or
(d) it is established that the information or data given by the proponent in
support of his application for an environmental impact assessment licence
was false, incorrect or intended to mislead.
29. Access to information
Information or documents submitted to the Authority by any person in connection with
an environmental impact assessment together with the Authority’s decision and the
reasons thereof shall be made available to the public on such terms and conditions as the
Authority may prescribe.
30. Protection of proprietary information
(1) A person submitting information to the Authority may at any time apply to the
Authority in Form 15 set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations to exclude the
information or parts thereof from being made available to the public on the basis of
commercial confidentiality or national security.
(2) If the Authority grants the request made under subregulation (1), the information or
specified parts of the information shall be excluded from public access, and an entry shalll

-- 91 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 92
be made in a register to be maintained by the Authority indicating in general the nature of
the information and the reason for which it is excluded from public access:
Provided that this information shall remain available to the Authority, and the
Authority shall take all measures to maintain confidentiality of the information and shall not
copy, circulate, publish or disclose such information.
(3) If the Authority rejects the claim that the information is proprietary, it shall
communicate the decision to the proponent within fourteen days of its decision.
(4) The Authority shall review its decision on an application made under this regulation
from time to time to determine whether the reasons for exclusion are still valid and
whether the exclusion should continue.
(5) A person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Authority under this Regulation
may appeal to the Tribunal against that decision.
PART V – ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT AND MONITORING
31. Environmental audit study
(1) An environmental audit study shall be undertaken on the following development
activities which are likely to have adverse environmental impacts—
(a) ongoing projects commenced prior to the coming into force of these
Regulations; or
(b) new projects undertaken after completion of an environmental impact
assessment study report.
(2) An environmental audit shall, unless it is a self-auditing study under regulation 34,
be conducted by a qualified and authorized environmental auditor or environmental
inspector who shall be an expert or a firm of experts registered in accordance with
regulation 14.
(3) The Authority shall require the proponent to undertake—
(a) in the case of an ongoing project—
(i) an initial environmental audit study followed by subsequent
environmental control audit studies as may be necessary at such
times as shall be agreed upon by the Authority and the proponent;
and
(ii) an initial environmental audit study to provide baseline information
upon which subsequent environmental control audit studies shall be
based; and
(b) an environmental audit study based on baseline information provided in the
environmental impact assessment report study.
(4) (a) The proponent of an ongoing project shall undertake an environmental audit of
the project within a period of twelve months from the date of publication of these
Regulations.
(b) A proponent of a project that has undergone an environmental impact
assessment study shall within a period of twelve months of the commencement of the
operations, and not more than twenty-four months after the completion of a project which-
ever is earlier, undertake an environmental audit of the project:
Provided that an audit may be required sooner if the life of the project is shorter
than the period prescribed under this Regulation.
(5) An environmental audit study specified under this Regulation shall be conducted in
accordance with the terms of reference developed by the proponent in consultation with
the Authority.

-- 92 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
93 [Issue 1]
(6) In carrying out the environmental audit study under this Regulation, the auditor
shall ensure that an appraisal of all the project activities, including the production of goods
and services is carried out, gives adequate consideration to environmental regulatory
frameworks, environmental health and safety measures and sustainable use of natural
resources.
(7) An audit report compiled under this Regulation shall include but shall not be limited
to the following information—
(a) the past and present impacts of the project;
(b) the responsibility and proficiency of the operators of the project;
(c) existing internal control mechanisms to identify and mitigate activities with a
negative environmental impact;
(d) existing internal control mechanisms to ensure the workers’ health and
safety; and
(e) the existence of environmental awareness and sensitization measures,
including environmental standards, and regulations, law and policy, for the
managerial and operational personnel.
32. Compliance with standards
In carrying out an environmental audit study, the environmental auditor shall comply
with any existing national environmental regulations and standards prescribed by the
Authority, and in the absence of such national environmental regulations and standards
shall use such other international standards as shall be prescribed by the Authority.
33. Control auditing
(1) A control audit shall be carried out by the Authority, whenever the Authority deems
it necessary to check compliance with the environmental parameters set for the project or
to verify self-auditing reports.
(2) A control audit shall—
(a) confirm that the environmental management plan of the project is being
adhered to; and
(b) verify the adequacy of the environmental management plan in mitigating the
negative impacts of a project.
34. Self auditing
(1) In executing a project, after the environmental impact assessment study report has
been approved by the Authority, or after the initial audit of an ongoing project, the
proponent shall take all practical measures to ensure the implementation of the
environmental management plan by—
(a) carrying out a self-auditing study on a regular basis;
(b) preparing an environmental audit report after each audit and submitting the
report to the Authority annually or as may be prescribed by the Authority;
and
(c) ensuring that the criteria used for the audit is based on the environmental
management plan developed during the environmental impact assessment
process or after the initial audit.
35. Contents of an environmental audit
(1) An environmental audit shall be carried out through questionnaires, an
environmental site visits and test analysis and in the manner specified in this Regulation.

-- 93 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 94
(2) In conducting an initial environmental audit an environmental auditor shall—
(a) consider the description of the project;
(b) indicate the objective, scope and criteria of the audit;
(c) study all relevant environmental law and regulatory frameworks on health
and safety, sustainable use of natural resources and on acceptable national
and international standards;
(d) verify the level of compliance by the proponent with the conditions of the
environmental management plan;
(e) evaluate the proponent’s knowledge and awareness of and responsibility for
the application of relevant legislation;
(f) review existing project documentation related to all infrastructural facilities
and designs;
(g) examine monitoring programs, parameters, and procedures in place for
control and corrective actions in case of emergencies;
(h) examine records of incidents and accidents and the likelihood of future
occurrence of the incidents and accidents;
(i) inspect all buildings, premises and yards in which manufacturing, testing
and transportation takes place within and without the project area, as well
as areas where goods are stored and disposed of and give a record of all
significant environmental risks associated with such activities;
(j) examine and seek views on health and safety issues from the project
employees, the local and other potentially affected communities; and
(k) prepare a list of health and environmental concerns of past and ongoing
activities.
(3) Where an environmental auditor is conducting a control audit, the environmental
auditor shall—
(a) consider the description of the project;
(b) indicate the objective, scope and criteria of the audit;
(c) inspect all buildings, premises and yards in which manufacturing, testing
and transportation takes place within and without the project area as well as
areas where goods are stored and disposed of and give a record of all
significant environmental risks associated with such activities;
(d) indicate the extent to which the environmental management plan
corresponds to the planned arrangements and, if implemented, achieves
the stated objectives;
(e) identify any significant source of air pollution, water pollution, land
contamination and degradation, local community disturbance, wildlife
disturbance and the health of the workers of the project; and
(f) prepare a list of concerns of on-going activities with recommendations.
36. The environmental audit report
(1) An environmental auditor shall indicate in an audit report the measures that exist
under the environmental management plan of the proposed project to bring the project up
to an acceptable environmental standard and how environmental impacts will be
addressed and controlled.
(2) An environmental audit report compiled under these Regulations shall contain—
(a) a presentation of the type of activity being audited;

-- 94 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
95 [Issue 1]
(b) an indication of the various materials, including non-manufactured
materials, the final products, and by-products, and waste generated;
(c) a description of the different technical activities, processes and operations
of the project;
(d) a description of the national environmental legislative and regulatory
frameworks on ecological and socio-economic matters;
(e) a description of the potentially affected environment on ecological and
socio-economic matters;
(f) a prioritization of all past and on-going concerns of the project;
(g) an identification of all environmental and occupational health and safety
concerns of the project;
(h) an opinion on the efficacy and adequacy of the environmental management
plan of the project;
(i) detailed recommendations for corrective activities, their cost, timetable and
mechanism for implementation;
(j) an indication of the measures taken under the environmental management
plan to ensure implementation is of acceptable environmental standards;
and
(k) a non-technical summary outlining the key findings, conclusions and
recommendations of the auditor.
37. Post audit orders
The Authority may issue an improvement order for the carrying out of corrective
measures for mitigating the environmental degradations revealed during any audit study.
38. Inspections
(1) An inspector may, at reasonable times, enter on any land, premises or facility of a
project for the purposes of inspection, to examine records and to make enquiries on the
project.
(2) A person who refuses to answer questions, refuses to avail documents or refuses
to give other information legitimately sought by the inspector commits an offence.
39. Audit petition by public
A member of the public may, after showing reasonable cause in writing, petition the
Authority to cause an audit to be carried out on any project.
40. Monitoring by the Authority and lead agencies
(1) The Authority shall in consultation with lead agencies—
(a) monitor environmental phenomena with a view to making an assessment of
any possible changes in the environment and their possible impacts;
(b) monitor the operations of any industry, project or activity with a view to
determining its immediate and long-term effect on the environment;
(c) except where a baseline survey has been carried out under regulation 31
cause the proponent to carry out a baseline survey to identify basic
environmental parameters in the project area before implementation;
(d) determine the parameters and measurable indicators to be used in
monitoring of projects; and
(e) conduct measurement of environmental changes that have occurred during
implementation.

-- 95 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 96
(2) The Authority shall, in consultation with the lead agencies monitor ongoing projects
on a continuous basis using parameters and indicators developed under this Regulation.
(3) The Authority shall, in consultation with the lead agency upon detection of non-
compliance with the conditions of approval of an environmental impact assessment
licence immediately, institute remedial action.
41. The monitoring report
(1) Where a lead agency has undertaken monitoring under regulation 40, it shall
submit a report to the Authority which report shall include the following—
(a) the name and address of proponent;
(b) the name of the proposed project;
(c) date of implementation of the proposed project;
(d) the date of the last monitoring report, including the report findings, action
taken and its result;
(e) details of the environmental parameters to be monitored;
(f) results of the actual monitoring exercise;
(g) new actions to be implemented including the criteria for the next evaluation;
and
(h) a non-technical summary of findings, conclusions and recommendations.
(2) An inspector may enter upon any land or premises for the purposes of monitoring
the effects of any activities carried on that land or premises upon the environment.
PART VI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
42. Strategic environmental assessment
(1) Lead agencies shall in consultation with the Authority subject all proposals for
public policy, plans and programmes for environmental implementation to a strategic
environmental assessment to determine which ones are the most environmentally friendly
and cost effective when implemented individually or in combination with others.
(2) The assessment carried out under this Regulation shall consider the effect of
implementation of alternative policy actions taking into consideration—
(a) the use of natural resources;
(b) the protection and conservation of biodiversity;
(c) human settlement and cultural issues;
(d) socio-economic factors; and
(e) the protection, conservation of natural physical surroundings of scenic
beauty as well as protection and conservation of built environment of
historic or cultural significance.
(3) The Government, and all the lead agencies shall in the development of sector or
national policy, incorporate principles of strategic environmental assessment.
43. Contents of strategic environmental impact report
(1) A strategic environmental impact report prepared under this Regulation shall
include the following information—
(a) the title of the report;
(b) a summary of the potential significant impacts of a proposed policy,
programme or plan;

-- 96 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
97 [Issue 1]
(c) potential opportunities to promote or enhance environmental conditions;
(d) recommendations for mitigating measures; and
(e) alternative policy, programme or plan options to ensure compliance with the
Act.
(2) The proposed policy, programme or plan specified in this Regulation shall state—
(a) the purpose and rational of the policy, programme or plan taking into
consideration socio-economic, environmental and cultural issues;
(b) alternatives and strategies of the policy, programme or plans;
(c) areas and sectors affected by the policy, programme, plan, or proposed
activities;
(d) an environmental analysis covering—
(i) baseline information focusing on areas potentially affected;
(ii) relevant legislative framework and related policy documents;
(iii) summary of views of key stakeholders consulted;
(iv) predicted impacts of the policy, programme or plan;
(v) alternative policy options and comparison against environmental
indicators;
(vii) ongoing projects and how they fit in the proposed policy, programme
or plan;
(e) recommendations outlining—
(i) suggested policy changes;
(ii) proposed mitigation measures;
(iii) strategic environment assessment; and
(f) relevant technical appendices such as stakeholders meetings referred to in
the assessment.
44. Regional and international issues
Where a project is likely to have a transboundary impact, the proponent shall, in
consultation with the Authority, ensure that appropriate measures are taken to mitigate
any adverse impacts taking into account any existing treaties and agreements between
Kenya and the other country.
45. Offences
(1) Notwithstanding any licence, permit or approval granted under any written law, any
person who commences, proceeds with, executes or conducts or causes to commence,
proceed with, execute or conduct any project without approval granted under these
Regulations commits an offence and on conviction is liable to the penalty prescribed under
the Act.
(2) Any person who—
(a) fails to prepare and submit a project report to the Authority contrary to
regulations 7 and 8;
(b) fails to prepare and submit an environmental impact assessment study
report contrary to regulations 18 and 19;
(c) is in breach of any condition of any licence or certificate issued under these
Regulations;
(d) fraudulently makes a false statement in a project report or environmental
impact assessment study report;

-- 97 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 98
(e) fraudulently alters a project report or an environmental impact assessment
study report;
(f) fraudulently makes a false statement in an environmental audit;
(g) fails to inform the Authority of a transfer of an environmental impact
assessment licence in accordance with regulation 26; or
(h) after an audit report is submitted fails to implement any mitigation measures
specified under regulation 37,
commits an offence and on conviction shall be liable to the penalty prescribed under the
Act.
46. Appeal to Tribunal
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by—
(a) a refusal to grant a licence or by a refusal to transfer a licence under these
Regulations;
(b) the imposition of any condition, limitation or restriction on a licence;
(c) the revocation, suspension or variation of a licence issued under these
Regulations;
(d) the amount of money which the person is required to pay as fees;
(e) the imposition of any environmental restoration order or environmental
improvement order on the project by the Authority; or
(f) the approval or reinstatement by the Authority of an environmental impact
assessment licence, may within sixty days after the date of the decision
against which he or she is dissatisfied, appeal to the Tribunal.
(2) A person aggrieved by a decision or order of the tribunal, may within sixty days of
such a decision or order, appeal against such decision or order to the High Court.
(3) The fact that approval is given in respect of an environmental impact assessment
shall not be a defence to any civil action or to a criminal prosecution under any enactment.
47. Registers
(1) The Authority shall maintain the following registers—
(a) a register of all individual experts or firms of experts duly authorized to
conduct or prepare environmental impact assessment studies and audits;
(b) a register of all environmental impact assessment licences issued under
these Regulations;
(c) a register of environmental impact assessment reports, audit study reports,
strategic environmental assessment reports and monitoring reports; and
(d) a register of approvals of applications seeking exclusion of proprietary
information from public access.
(2) The registers referred to in subparagraph (1) shall be public documents
maintained at the offices of the Authority for inspection by any person on the payment of
the prescribed fees.
48. Fees
The Authority may, for the purposes of these Regulations charge the fees specified in
the Fifth Schedule to these Regulations.

-- 98 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
99 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Corr. No. 40/2003, L.N. 133/2007, s. 5.]
FORM 1 (r. 6)
Application Reference No. ..................................
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
SUBMISSION OF PROJECT REPORT
PART A – DETAILS OF PROPONENT
A1. Name of Proponent (Person or Firm): ........................................................................................
A2. PIN No.: ......................................................................................................................................
A3. Address: .....................................................................................................................................
A4. Name of contact person: ............................................................................................................
A5. Telephone No.: .......................................... A6. Fax No.: .........................................................
A7. E-mail: ........................................................................................................................................
PART B – DETAILS OF THE PROJECT REPORT
B1. Title of the proposed project: ......................................................................................................
B2. Objectives and scope of the project: ..........................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
B3. Description of the activities: ........................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
B4. Location of the proposed project: ...............................................................................................
PART C – DECLARATION BY THE PROPONENT
I hereby certify that the particulars given above are correct and true to the best of my knowledge.
Name: ................................................................... Position: ...............................................................
Signature: ...........................................................
On behalf of: .......................................................
Date: ...................................................................
(Firm name and seal)
PART D – DETAILS OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT EXPERT
Name (individual/firm): ..........................................................................................................................
Certificate of registration No.: ...............................................................................................................
Address: ...............................................................................................................................................
Tel: ............................................... Fax: ..................................... E-mail: ............................................
PART E – FOR OFFICIAL USE
Approved/not approved: .......................................................................................................................
Comments: ...........................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Officer: ........................................ Sign: ....................................... Date: ............................................
NB: 1. If the Project Report does not contain sufficient information required under the Environmental
(Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations the applicant may be requested to give further
information concerning the project or be notified of any defects in the application and may be
required to provide the additional information.

-- 99 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 100
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM 1—continued
2. Any person who fraudulently makes a false statement in a project report or alters the project
report commits an offence.
Important Notes: Please submit the following—
(a) Three copies of this form
(b) 10 copies of the project report
(c) the prescribed fees, to:
Director-General
The National Environment Management
Authority.
FORM 2 (r. 19)
Application Reference No.: .................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
SUBMISSION OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
PART A – DETAILS OF PROPONENT
A1. Name of proponent (Person or Firm) .........................................................................................
A2. PIN No. .......................................................................................................................................
A3. Address ......................................................................................................................................
A4. Name of contact person .............................................................................................................
A5. Telephone No. ............................................ A6. Fax No. .........................................................
A7. E-mail .........................................................................................................................................
PART B – DETAILS OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
B1. Title of the proposed project .......................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
B2. Objectives and scope of the project ...........................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
B3. Description of the activities .........................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
B4. Location of the proposed project ................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................................................
PART C – DECLARATION BY THE PROPONENT
I hereby certify that the particulars given above are correct and true to the best of my knowledge.
Name ..................................................................... Position ...............................................................
Signature ............................................................ On behalf of ........................................................
Date ....................................................................
(Firm name and seal)
PART D – DETAILS OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT EXPERT
Name(individual/firm) ............................................................................................................................
Certificate of registration No .................................................................................................................

-- 100 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
101 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM 2—continued
Address ................................................................................................................................................
Tel ................................................. Fax ...................................... E-mail ............................................
PART E – OFFICIAL USE
Approved/not approved ........................................................................................................................
Comments ............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Officer .......................................... Sign ........................................ Date ............................................
Important Notes: Please submit the following—
(a) Three copies of this form
(b) 10 copies of the project study report
(c) the prescribed fees, to:
Director-General
The National Environment Management
Authority.
FORM 3 (r. 24)
Application Reference No. ..................................
Registration No. ..................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
This is to certify that the Project Report/Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report .................
.......................... received from ................................................................................................. (name
of individual/firm) ......................................................................... (address) submitted to the National
Environment Management Authority in accordance with the Environmental Impact Assessment and
Audit Regulations regarding ........................................................................................ (title of project)
whose objective is to carry on ..............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
(briefly describe purpose) located at ................................................................... (locality and District)
has been reviewed and a licence is hereby issued for implementation of the project, subject to
attached conditions.
Dated this ...................................... day ....................................... 20.............
Signature .........................................................................................................
(Seal)
.............................................................................
Director-General
The National Environmental Management
Authority

-- 101 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 102
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM 3—continued
Conditions of Licence:
1. This licence is valid for a period of .............................................................. (time within which the
project should commence) from the date hereof.
2. The Director-General shall be notified of any transfer/variation/surrender of this licence.
FORM 4 (r. 14(2))
Application Reference No.: .................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION AS AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT/AUDIT
EXPERT
PART A – DETAILS OF APPLICANT
A1. Name of proponent (Individual or Firm) ......................................................................................
A2. Nationality ...................................................................................................................................
A3. PIN No. .......................................................................................................................................
A4. Firm (Local/Foreign) ...................................................................................................................
A4. Business registration No. (where applicable) .......................................... Date .........................
A5. Address ......................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
A6. Telephone No. ............................................ A7. Fax No. .........................................................
A8. E-mail .........................................................................................................................................
A9. Applicants academic / professional qualifications: .....................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
A10. List of professionals and their academic/professional qualifications and their nationalities
(where applicable) ......................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
A11. Experience in Environmental Impact Assessment related activities ..........................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
A12. Application for registration as Lead Expert or Associate Expert ................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
A13. Previous registration No. and date of registration (if applicable) ................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
PART B – DECLARATION BY APPLICANT
B1. I hereby certify that the particulars given above are correct and true to the best of my
knowledge and belief.
.................................................. .................................................. ..................................................
Signature of applicant Full name in block letters Position
On behalf of ........................................................................... ..................................................
Firm name and seal Date

-- 102 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
103 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM 4—continued
PART C – FOR OFFICIAL USE
Approved/Not approved ........................................................................................................................
Comments ............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Official ................................. Signature ........................................ Date ............................................
Important Notes: Please submit the following:
(a) Application Form in duplicate;
(b) curriculum vitae of all applicants; and
(c) the prescribed fee, to:
Director-General
National Environment Management Authority
(NEMA)
FORM 5 (r. 14(4))
Application Reference No.: .................................
Registration No.: .................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION AS AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT/AUDIT
EXPERT
This is to certify Mr./s. ...........................................................................................................................
of .......................................................................................................................................... (Address)
has been registered as an Environmental Impact Assessment Expert in accordance with the
provisions of the Environment Management and Co-ordination Act and is authorized to practice in
the capacity of a Lead Expert/Associate Expert/Firm of Experts (Type) ..............................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Dated this .................................. day of ....................................... 20.............
Signature .........................................................................................................
(Seal)
Director-General
National Environmental Management Authority
FORM 6 and 7
[Deleted by L.N. 133/2007, s. 4.]

-- 103 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 104
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
Form 6 (Rule 15(1))
[Deleted by L.N. 133/2007, s. 4.]
Form 7 (Rule 15(2))
[Deleted by L.N. 133/2007, s. 4.]
FORM 8 (Rule 21)
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the
National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact
Assessment Study Report for the implementation of the proposed project .........................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................. (brief description of project)
at ...........................................................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................................. (locality) of
.................................................................................................................................................. District.
The said project anticipates the following impact .................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
(describe anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures).
The full report of the proposed project may be inspected during working hours at—
(a) The NEMA Headquarters,
(b) ........................................................................................................................................................
(c) ........................................................................................................................................................
NEMA invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within .................................
days of the date of publication of this notice to assist the Authority in the approval process of the
project to—
(a) Director-General, NEMA
(b) ........................................................................................................................................................
(c) ........................................................................................................................................................
Dated this ............................................................... day ............................................... of 20 ............
Signature ............................................................
(Seal)
Director-General
The National Environmental Management
Authority.

-- 104 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
105 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
FORM 9 (r. 25)
Application Reference No.: .................................
Licence No.:.........................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATON ACT
APPLICATION FOR VARIATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
PART A – PREVIOUS APPLICATIONS
No previous application for variation of an environmental impact assessment licence.*
The environmental impact assessment licence was previously amended. *
PART B – DETAILS OF APPLICANT:
B1. Name (Individual or Firm): ..........................................................................................................
B2. Business Registration No.: .........................................................................................................
B3. Address: .....................................................................................................................................
B4. Name of contact person: ............................................................................................................
B5. Position of contact person: .........................................................................................................
B6. Address of contact person: .........................................................................................................
Telephone No: ................................................... Fax No.: .........................................................
E-mail: ........................................................................................................................................
PART C – DETAILS OF CURRENT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
C1. Name of the current Environmental Impact Assessment licence holder: ...................................
....................................................................................................................................................
C2. Application No. of the current Environmental Impact Assessment licence: ...............................
....................................................................................................................................................
C3. Date of issue of the current Environmental Impact Assessment licence: ...................................
....................................................................................................................................................
PART D – PROPOSED VARIATIONS TO THE CONDITIONS IN CURRENT ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
D1: Conditions in the current Environmental Impact Assessment licence: .......................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
D2: Proposed variation(s): ................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
D3: Reason for variation(s): ..............................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
D4: Describe the environmental changes arising from the proposed variations(s): ..........................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
D5: Describe how the environment and the community might be affected by the proposed
variation(s): .................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................

-- 105 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 106
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM 9—continued
D6: Describe how and to what extent the environmental performance requirements set out in the
EIA report previously approved or project profile previously submitted for this project may be
affected: ......................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
D7: Describe any additional measures proposed to eliminate, reduce or control any adverse
environmental impact arising from the proposed variation(s) and to meet the requirements in
the Technical Memorandum on Environmental Impact Assessment Process: ..........................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
PART E – DECLARATION BY APPLICANT
I hereby certify that the particulars given above are correct and true to the best of my knowledge
and belief. I understand the environmental impact assessment licence may be suspended, varied or
cancelled if any information given above is false, misleading, wrong or incomplete.
.................................................. .................................................. ..................................................
Name Position Signature
On behalf of ........................................................................... ..................................................
Company name and seal Date
PART F – OFFICIAL USE
Approved/Not approved ........................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Comments ............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Officer ................................. Signature ........................................ Date ............................................
Important Notes
Please submit—
(a) 3 copies of this completed Form; and
(b) The prescribed fee, to:
Director-General
The National Environment Management
Authority.
* Delete where applicable
FORM 10 (r. 25)
Application Reference No.: .................................
Certificate No.: ....................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
CERTIFICATE OF VARIATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
This is to certify that the Environmental Impact Assessment Licence No. ...........................................
Issued on ..................................................................... (date) to .........................................................

-- 106 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
107 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM 10—continued
(name of individual/firm) of ................................................................................................... (address)
regarding ..............................................................................................................................................
(title of project) whose objective is to ....................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................................... (briefly
describe purpose) located at ............................................................................... (locality and District)
has been has been varied to ................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
.............................. (nature of variation) with effect from ......................................................... (date of
variation) in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Dated this ...................................... day ................................... of 20.............
Signature .........................................................................................................
(Seal)
Director-General
The National Environmental Management
Authority.
FORM 11 (r. 26)
Application Reference No.: .................................
Licence No.: ........................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
NOTIFICATION OF TRANSFER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
PART A – DETAILS OF CURRENT LICENCE
A1. Name of the current Environmental Impact Assessment licence holder ....................................
....................................................................................................................................................
A2. PIN No. .......................................................................................................................................
A3. Address .............................................................. A4. Tel .........................................................
A5. Fax No ........................................................... A6. E-mail .........................................................
A7. Application No. of current Environmental Impact Assessment licence ......................................
....................................................................................................................................................
A8. Date of issue of current Environmental Impact Assessment licence ..........................................
....................................................................................................................................................
PART B – DETAILS OF THE TRANSFEREE
B1. Name (Individual/Firm) ...............................................................................................................
B2. PIN No. .......................................................................................................................................
B3. Address ............................................................. B4. Tel. .........................................................
B5. Fax No ........................................................... B6. E-mail .........................................................
B7. Name of contact person .............................................................................................................

-- 107 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 108
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
B8. Capacity of transferee to run the project (financial, technological, manpower) ..........................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
PART C – REASON(S) FOR TRANSFER OF LICENCE
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
PART D – DECLARATION BY TRANSFEROR AND TRANSFEREE
It is hereby notified that .................................................................................................................... of
....................................... on this day of ............................................................................. transferred
EIA licence No. ............................................. to .............................................................................. of
.................................... who will assume his responsibility for all liability under this project.
Transferor Transferee
Name .................................................................. Name ..................................................................
Address .............................................................. Address ..............................................................
Signed ................................................................ Signed ................................................................
Date .................................................................... Date ....................................................................
PART E – FOR OFFICIAL USE
Approved/Not approved ........................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Comments ............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Officer ................................. Signature ........................................ Date ............................................
Important Notes—
1. Where an Environmental Impact Assessment licence is transferred, the person to whom it is
transferred and the person transferring it shall jointly notify the Director-General, of the transfer.
2. The person holding an environmental impact assessment licence assumes responsibility for the
transfer of the licence only in respect of the project to which this licence was issued.
3. Any transfer of an environmental impact assessment licence, shall take effect on the date the
Director-General is notified.
4. This Form must be submitted in quadruplet, with
5. Prescribed fees, to:
Director-General
The National Environment Management
Authority.

-- 108 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
109 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
FORM 12 (r. 26)
Application Reference No.: .................................
Certificate No.: ....................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
This is to certify that the Environmental Impact Assessment Licence No.: ..........................................
Issued on ..................................................................... (date) to .........................................................
(name of previous holder) of ................................................................................................. (address)
regarding ..................................................................................................................... (title of project)
.................................................................................................................................................... whose
objective is to ........................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
(briefly describe purpose) located at ................................................................... (locality and district)
has been transferred to ............................................................................................................. (name
of new holder) of ................................................................................................................... (address)
with effect from ......................................................................................................... (date of transfer)
in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Dated this ...................................... day ................................... of 20.............
Signature .........................................................................................................
(Seal)
.............................................................................
Director-General
The National Environmental Management
Authority.
Important notes—
1. The transferee as well as the transferor of a licence under this Regulation shall be liable for all
liabilities, and the observance of all obligations imposed by the transfer in respect of the licence
transferred.
2. The transferor shall not be responsible for any future liabilities or any obligations so imposed
with regard to the licence from the date the transfer is approved.
FORM 13 (r. 27)
Application Reference No.: .................................
Licence No.: ........................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
NOTIFICATION OF SURRENDER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
PART A – PROPONENT DETAILS
A1. Name (Individual or Firm) ...........................................................................................................
A2. PIN No. .......................................................................................................................................

-- 109 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 110
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM 13—continued
A3. Address ......................................................................................................................................
A4. Name of contact person .............................................................................................................
A5. Position of contact person: .........................................................................................................
A6. Address ............................................ Tel ................................... Fax No. ...............................
E-mail .........................................................................................................................................
PART B – DETAILS OF THE CURRENT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSEMENT LICENCE
B1. Environmental Impact Licence No. .............................................................................................
B2. Title of project under the current Environmental Impact licence: ...............................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
B3. Please state the following details of the Environmental Impact Assessment licence to be
surrendered.
(a) Scope/scale of project(s) ....................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................................
(b) Conditions on the EIA licence .............................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................................
PART C – REASON(S) FOR SURRENDER
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
PART D – DECLARATION BY PROPONENT
I hereby certify that the particulars given above are correct and true to the best of my knowledge
and belief.
.................................................. .................................................. ..................................................
Name of Applicant Full name in block letters Position
On behalf of ........................................................................... ..................................................
Company name and seal Date
PART E – FOR OFFICIAL USE
Approved/Not approved ........................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Comments ............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Officer ................................. Signature ........................................ Date ............................................
Important Notes—
Intent to surrender an environmental impact assessment licence should be communicated to the
Authority at least six months before the date of surrender.

-- 110 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
111 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
FORM 14 (r. 27)
Application Reference No.: .................................
Certificate No.: ....................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
CERTIFICATE OF SURRENDER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE
This is to certify that the Environmental Impact Assessment Licence No.: ..........................................
issued on ..................................................................... (date) to .........................................................
(name of individual/firm) of ................................................................................................... (address)
regarding ..............................................................................................................................................
(title of project) whose objective is to .......................................................... (briefly describe purpose)
located at ..................................................................................... (locality and District) has been duly
surrendered with effect from ......................................................... (date) to the National Environment
Management Authority in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Dated this ..................................... day ................................... of 20 .............
Signature .........................................................................................................
(Seal)
.............................................................................
Director-General
The National Environmental Management
Authority.
Important Note—
A surrender shall be without prejudice to any liabilities or obligations which have accrued on the
holder of the licence prior to the date of surrender.
FORM 15 (r. 29)
Form No. .............................................................
Reference No. ....................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
APPLICATION FOR ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PART A – DETAILS OF APPLICANT
A1. Name: .........................................................................................................................................
Address: .....................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
Telephone: .............................................................. Fax: .........................................................
Email: .........................................................................................................................................
Profession ..................................................................................................................................
Date: ...........................................................................................................................................

-- 111 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 112
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
A2. NAME OF EMPLOYER (if applicable): .......................................................................................
Address: .....................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
Telephone: .............................................................. Fax: .........................................................
E-mail: ........................................................................................................................................
Designation: ...............................................................................................................................
PART B – INFORMATION DETAILS
B1. TYPE OF INFORMATION REQUIRED (tick as appropriate)
 Project Report.
 Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report.
 Environmental Audit Report.
 Strategic Environmental Assessment Report.
 Environmental Monitoring Report.
 Record of Decision (ROD) for Environmental Impact Assessment Approvals.
 Licences for Project Reports.
 Licences for Environmental Impact Assessment.
 Environmental Impact Assessment Experts (Individuals).
 Environmental Impact Assessment Experts (Firms).
B2. DOCUMENT
Title of the document ..................................................................................................................
Author .........................................................................................................................................
Year ............................................................................................................................................
B3. HOW THE INFORMATION IS EXTRACTED?  Reading
 Inspection/viewing
B4. PURPOSE FOR REQUIRING THE INFORMATION
 Educational  Research  Interested party
 Affected party
Important note—
A prescribed fee of Kshs. 200 will be charged for access information per record/register.
FORM 16A (rule 47)
REGISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT/AUDIT EXPERTS: (FIRMS)
Name of
Firm
Registration
No.
Date of
Registration
Contact
Address
Area of
Specialization
Experience
& Category
(eg. Lead,
Associate)
Signature of
Filing Officer

-- 112 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
113 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
FORM 16B (r. 47)
REGISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT/AUDIT EXPERTS:
(INDIVIDUALS)
Name of
Person
Registration
No.
Date of
Registration
Contact
Address
Area of
Specialization Experience Signature of
Filing Officer
FORM 16C (r. 47)
REGISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT PROJECT REPORTS
SUBMITTED TO NEMA
Name of
Proponent
Title of
Project
Location
of Project Sector Date
Received
Status of
Project
Signature
of Filing
Officer
Decision
of NEMA

-- 113 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 114
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
FORM 16D (r. 47)
REGISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORTS
SUBMITTED TO NEMA
Name of
Proponent
Title of
Project
Location
of Project Sector Date
Received
Status of
Project
Signature
of Filing
Officer
Remarks
FORM 16E (r. 47)
REGISTER OF STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT REPORTS SUBMITTED
TO NEMA
Name of
Proponent
Title of
Project
Location
of Project Sector Date
Received
Status of
Project
Signature
of Filing
Officer
Remarks

-- 114 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
115 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—
continued
FORM 16F
 
(Rule 47)
REGISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCES
Project
Title
Name of
	Proponent
Location of
Project
Value of
	Project	
(Kshs
)
Licence
No.
Date of
	Issue
Conditions
	Attached to
	Licence
 (If
Any
)
Date
	Filed
Status of
	Licence
Name of
Filing
	Officer
Date And
Signature of
	Filing Officer
Remarks
Note: Details of Status of Licence
(a) New
	(b) Transferred
	(c) Surrendered

-- 115 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 116
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
FORM 16G (r. 47)
REGISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT AUDIT REPORTS
Title of
Project
Name of
Proponent
Location
of Project Sector Date
Received
Status of
Project
Signature
of Filing
Officer
Date Remarks
FORM 16H (r. 47)
REGISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT MONITORING REPORTS
Title of
Project
Name of
Proponent
Location
of Project Sector Date
Received
Status of
Project
Signature
of Filing
Officer
Date Remarks

-- 116 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
117 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
FORM 16I (r. 47)
REGISTER OF THE PROPRIETARY INFORMATION
Title of
Firm
Name of
Proponent
Licence
Register
Contact
Address
Type of
Proprietary
Information
Status of
Project
Signature
of Filing
Officer
Remarks
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Regulation 11.]
ISSUES TO BE CONSIDERED IN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
The following issues may, among others, be considered in the making of
environmental impact assessments.
1. Ecological Considerations—
(a) Biological diversity including—
(i) effect of proposal on number, diversity, breeding habits, etc. of wild
animals and vegetation;
(ii) gene pool of domesticated plants and animals e.g. monoculture as
opposed to wild types.
(b) Sustainable use including—
(i) effect of proposal on soil fertility;
(ii) breeding populations of fish, game or wild animals;
(iii) natural regeneration of woodland and sustainable yield;
(iv) wetland resource degrading or wise use of wetlands.
(c) Ecosystem maintenance including—
(i) effect of proposal on food chains;
(ii) nutrient cycles;

-- 117 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 118
(iii) aquifer recharge, water run-off rates etc.;
(iv) a real extent of habitants;
(v) fragile ecosystems.
2. Social considerations including—
(a) economic impacts;
(b) social cohesion or disruption;
(c) effect on human health;
(d) immigration or emigration;
(e) communication — roads opened up, closed, rerouted;
(f) effects on culture and objects of culture value.
3. Landscape—
(a) views opened up or closed;
(b) visual impacts (features, removal of vegetation), etc.;
(c) compatibility with surrounding area;
(d) amenity opened up or closed, e.g. recreation possibilities.
4. Land uses—
(a) effects of proposal on current land uses and land use potentials in the project
area;
(b) possibility of multiple use;
(c) effects of proposal on surrounding land uses and land use potentials.
5. Water—
Important aspects to consider are the effects of the proposal on—
(a) water sources (quantity and quality)—
(i) rivers;
(ii) springs;
(iii) lakes (natural and man-made);
(iv) underground water;
(v) oceans.
(b) drainage patterns / drainage systems.
THIRD SCHEDULE
[Regulation 12.]
GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR CARRYING OUT AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT STUDY
An environmental impact assessment study shall be conducted in accordance with
the general environmental impact assessment guidelines and administrative procedures
issued by the Authority. An environmental impact assessment study shall include the
following—
1. Sources of Impact.
2. Project Inputs.

-- 118 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
119 [Issue 1]
3. Project Activities.
4. Areas of Impact on the Natural and Human Environments.
5. Environmental Impacts (General Impacts on the Natural and Human
Environment).
6. Environmental Guidelines and Standards (National Legislation, International
guidelines. International Conventions and Treaties)
7. Mitigation Measures.
8. Environmental Management Plan.
9. Environmental Monitoring and Auditing.
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 13(2).]
CRITERIA FOR ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT EXPERTS
Local and foreign environmental impact assessment individual and firm of experts wishing
to undertake environmental impact assessment activities in Kenya shall register as
experts with the National Environment Management Authority on payment of the
prescribed fees. The following shall be the criteria for registration of experts—
A. LEAD EXPERT
A lead expert must have attained the following qualifications:
A Doctorate degree or equivalent in any field plus training in environmental impact
assessment from a recognised institution, with 3 years experience in environmental
impact assessment related activities;
or
A Doctorate, Masters or Bachelors degree plus 5 years experience in environmental
impact assessment related research consultancy or teaching and at least two relevant
publications in referred journals;
or
A Masters degree or equivalent in any field plus training in environmental impact
assessment from a recognised institution, with 5 years experience in environmental
impact assessment related activities;
or
A Bachelors degree or an equivalent in any field plus training in environmental impact
assessment from a recognised institution, with 8 years experience in environmental
impact assessment related activities.
B. ASSOCIATE EXPERT
An associate expert must have attained the following qualifications:
A Bachelors degree or equivalent in any field plus training in environmental impact
assessment from a recognised institution.
C. FIRM OF EXPERTS
A firm of experts must meet the following conditions:
Must be registered in Kenya;

-- 119 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 120
Must submit to the Authority a firm profile indicating capacity to undertake
environmental impact assessment /audit studies.
FIFTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 48, Corr. No. 40/2003, L.N. 133/2007, s. 5, L.N. 30/2009, s. 2.]
FEES
1. Application for registration as Environmental Impact Assessment/Audit*
expert ..................................................................................................... Shs. 500
2. Deleted by L.N. 133/2007, s. 5(b).)
3. Inspection of records/register .................................................................. 200 per record/register.
4. Environmental impact assessment licence -0.05% of the total cost of the project, to the
minimum of KSh. 10,000 and maximum of KSh. 1,000,000 payable as follows:
(a) 50% of the 0.05% being Processing Fee Payable upon submission of a project report;
(b) 50% of the 0.05% being licence fee payable upon collection of the Environmental Impact
Assessment Licence
5. Surrender, transfer or variation of environmental impact assessment licence .................... 5,000.
* Delete where applicable

-- 120 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
121 [Issue 1]
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE RULES, 2003
ARRANGEMENT OF RULES
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Rule
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – APPEALS AND REFERRALS TO TRIBUNAL
3. Appeals.
4. Notice of appeal.
5. Additional matters.
6. Registration of appeal.
7. Application for extension of time.
8. Documents to accompany appeal or reply.
9. Preliminary objections.
10. Amendment of appeal and delivery of supplementary grounds of appeal.
11. Referral of matter by Authority to Tribunal.
12. Notification and action on referrals.
13. Appeal by minors and persons under disability.
PART III – REPLY
14. Action by respondent.
15. Amendment of reply.
PART IV – THIRD PARTIES
16. Joinder of parties.
17. Intervener.
PART V – HEARING
18. Directions and pre-hearing orders.
19. Failure to comply with directions.
20. Varying or setting aside directions.
21. Subpoenas and orders.
22. Place and time of hearing.
23. Public notice of hearings.
24. Exclusions of persons disrupting proceedings.
25. Failure of parties to attend hearing.
26. Procedure at hearing.
27. Demonstration and display facilities.
28. Judicial notice.
29. Determination of interlocutory matters.
30. Opportunity to be heard or cross-examine.
31. Change of advocate.

-- 121 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 122
PART VI – DETERMINATION APPEAL
Rule
32. Failure to reply and no contest.
33. Withdrawal of appeal.
34. Preliminary issues.
35. Power to determine appeal without hearing.
36. Consolidation of appeals.
37. Decision of Tribunal.
38. Reasons for decisions.
39. Order for costs and expenses.
PART VII – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
40. Chairman to act for Tribunal.
41. Additional powers of Tribunal.
42. Correcting irregularities.
43. Proof of documents and certification of decisions.
44. Service or delivery of documents.
45. Substituted service.
46. Language.
47. Filing Fees.
48. Prescribed Forms.
49. Recording of proceedings.

-- 122 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
123 [Issue 1]
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE RULES, 2003
[L.N. 177/2003, L.N. 191/2003.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
1. Citation
These Rules may be cited as the National Environmental Tribunal Procedure Rules,
2003.
2. Interpretation
In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires—
“appellant” means a person who makes an appeal to the Tribunal under section
129 of the Act, and includes a duly authorized agent or legal representative of that
person;
“Chairman” means the person holding office or acting as Chairman of the
Tribunal;
“disputed decision” means a decision of the Authority against which an appeal is
brought under these Rules and includes a failure or refusal to make a decision by the
Authority or its officer or committee;
“hearing” means a sitting of the Tribunal for the purpose of enabling the Tribunal
to reach or announce a decision, other than such a sitting in exercise of the power to
determine an appeal without an oral hearing;
“party”, in relation to an appeal, includes the appellant, the Authority and any
person joined to the proceedings as an appellant or a respondent or an intervener;
“referral” means a reference by the Authority to the Tribunal pursuant to section
132 of the Act;
“register” means the register of appeals and decisions kept in accordance with
these Rules;
“respondent”, in relation to any proceedings before the Tribunal (including a
referral before the Tribunal), means the Authority or any other party to the proceedings
other than the appellant.
PART II – APPEALS AND REFERRALS TO TRIBUNAL
3. Appeals
Any person who is aggrieved by any determination or decision of the Authority or any
of its Committees or officers as specified in subsections (1) and (2) of section 129 of the
Act may appeal to the Tribunal in accordance with these Rules.
4. Notice of appeal
(1) An Appeal to the Tribunal shall be made by written notice, and where the Tribunal
shall be made by written notice, and where the Tribunal has approved a form of notice for
the purpose, in the form so approved.

-- 123 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 124
(2) The appellant shall send or deliver six copies of the notice of appeal the Tribunal
so as to reach it not later than sixty (60) days after the date on which the disputed decision
was given to or served upon him.
(3) The notice shall include—
(a) the name and address of the appellant(s);
(b) the particulars of the disputed decision; and
(c) a statement of the purpose of the hearing and a short and precise statement
of the grounds of the appellant’s dissatisfaction with the decision which is
the subject of the appeal.
(4) The appellant or his representative shall sign the notice of appeal.
(5) The Tribunal shall duly acknowledge receipt of the notice of appeal and will advise
the appellant or his representative of any further steps required to enable the Tribunal to
decide the appeal as well as the time and place of the hearing of the appeal.
5. Additional matters
The appellant may include in his notice of appeal, or in a separate application to the
Tribunal any of the following—
(a) a request for an early hearing of the appeal, and the reasons for that
request;
(b) a notification that, at the hearing of his appeal, he intends to call an expert
witness or witnesses and the name and address and description of the field
of expertise of each such proposed witness;
(c) a request that a particular expert, if any, who took part in the disputed
decision shall attend the hearing of the appeal and give evidence.
6. Registration of appeal
(1) Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Tribunal shall—
(a) send to the appellant an acknowledgement of its receipt;
(b) enter the particulars of the appeal in a register kept by the Tribunal for the
purpose;
(c) inform the parties in writing of the case number of the appeal as entered in
the register; and
(d) advise the parties of the address to which notices and communications to
the Tribunal shall be sent.
(2) Subject to paragraph (2) of rule 8, the Tribunal shall, on request of a party,
forthwith serve a copy of the notice of appeal and of any reply, together with any
amendments or supplementary statements, written representations or other documents
received from any party, on all the other parties to the proceedings and, if any person or
body is subsequently joined as a party, upon that person or body.
7. Application for extension of time
The Tribunal may for good reason shown, on application, extend the time appointed by
these Rules (not being a time limited by the Act) for doing any act or taking any
proceedings, and may do so upon such terms and conditions, if any, as appear to it just
and expedient.

-- 124 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
125 [Issue 1]
8. Documents to accompany appeal or reply
(1) Any party to proceedings before the Tribunal shall deliver to the Tribunal with his
appeal or reply, as the case may be, a copy of every document including every map, plan,
certificate or report upon which he intends to rely for the purposes of his appeal or reply:
Provided that where any such document is already in the possession of the Tribunal
or the party or parties to the proceedings, the Tribunal may, on such terms as it thinks fit,
excuse a party from the provisions of this rule.
(2) If any document required to be delivered to the Tribunal under this rule, in the
opinion of the party who has possession of the document, relates to his intimate personal
or financial circumstances or is commercially sensitive and the party concerned seeks to
restrict its disclosure, he shall inform the Tribunal of that fact and of his reasons for
seeking such a restriction; whereupon the Tribunal shall serve the copies as provided in
this rule only in accordance with the directions of the Chairman.
9. Preliminary objections
(1) Any objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal or to the admissibility of an appeal
or other objection, the Tribunal’s decision upon which is requested before proceeding to
consider the merits of the appeal, shall be made to the Tribunal in writing within thirty days
from the date when the party objecting was notified of the appeal, and a copy of the
preliminary objection shall be served on the appellant immediately.
(2) On receipt of any preliminary objection, the Tribunal shall suspend the
proceedings on merits and shall require the appellant to submit written observations and
submissions on the objection within seven days from the date of service on him of notice
of the objection.
(3) The Tribunal shall suspend the proceedings on merits pending its ruling on the
objection.
10. Amendment of appeal and delivery of supplementary grounds of appeal
(1) The appellant may, at any time before he is notified of the date of the hearing of
the appeal, amend his notice of appeal or any statement of grounds of appeal or deliver a
supplementary statement of grounds of appeal.
(2) The appellant may, with the leave of the Tribunal, amend any notice of appeal or
statement of grounds of appeal at any time after he has been notified of the date of the
hearing of the appeal or at the hearing itself.
(3) The Tribunal may grant such leave to amend the notice or statement on such
terms as it thinks fit.
(4) The appellant shall send or supply to the Tribunal, and the Tribunal shall serve on
the respondent and any other party to the proceedings, a copy of every amendment and
supplementary statement.
11. Referral of matter by Authority to Tribunal
(1) Where a matter is referred to the Tribunal for directions under section 132 of the
Act, Authority shall provide the Tribunal with copies of all the relevant information relating
to the matter and such other material as has been produced to or considered by the
Authority in considering the matter.
(2) The Authority shall within fourteen days give notice to the all parties affected by
the matter of the referral to the Tribunal.

-- 125 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 126
12. Notification and action on referrals
(1) Upon receiving a notice of a referral from the Authority in which any person is
named as a concerned party or in any capacity, the Tribunal shall immediately write to
such person inviting him to state whether he wishes to take part in the proceedings and to
furnish such information as is appropriate to the case.
(2) Any person who receives a copy of a notice of a referral from the Authority or
invitation from the Tribunal under this rule may give notice to the Tribunal that he wishes
to take part in the proceedings and furnish such information as may be required or
appropriate; and such notice to the Tribunal shall, if such person becomes a respondent to
proceedings be treated as his reply thereto.
13. Appeal by minors and persons under disability
When the person by whom an appeal may be brought is a minor or is under a
disability, the appeal may, subject to any conditions imposed by the Tribunal, be brought
by a person legally authorized to act or by a person appointed by the Tribunal; and such
person may take all necessary steps and do all things for the purpose of the appeal as an
appellant is, by these Rules, required or authorised to take or do.
PART III – REPLY
14. Action by respondent
(1) Upon receipt of a copy of a notice of appeal setting forth the grounds of appeal or
a separate statement of grounds of appeal, the Authority shall deliver to the Tribunal a
written reply which shall state—
(a) whether or not the Authority intends to oppose the appeal and the grounds
on which it relies in opposing the appeal; and
(b) if, in the opinion of the Authority, any other person has a direct interest in
the subject matter of the appeal, the name and address of such other
person.
(2) Subject to paragraph (2) of rule 8, the Authority shall include with its reply a
statement summarizing the facts relating to the disputed decision and, if they are not part
of that decision, the reasons therefor, and shall deliver to the Tribunal sufficient copies of
the reply and other relevant documents to enable the Tribunal to provide a copy of each of
them to the appellant and any other person or persons named by the Authority as having
a direct interest in the subject matter of the appeal.
(3) In its reply or in a separate notice to the Tribunal, the Authority may request—
(a) further particulars of the appeal; or
(b) a determination of any question as a preliminary issue.
(4) Every reply by the Authority shall be signed by the Director-General or the
Secretary of the Authority and shall be delivered to the Tribunal not later than twenty-one
days after the date of service on the Authority of the copy of the notice of appeal or, if
received later, the copy of the separate grounds of appeal.
(5) The provisions of this rule shall apply, with any necessary modifications, to the
concerned parties referred to in section 132 of the Act in the same way as they apply to
the Authority.
15. Amendment of reply
(1) The Authority may, at any time before it is notified of the date of the hearing of the
appeal, amend its reply or deliver a supplementary statement by way of reply.

-- 126 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
127 [Issue 1]
(2) The Authority may, with the leave of the Tribunal, amend its reply at any time after
it has been notified of the date of the hearing of the appeal or at the hearing itself.
(3) The Tribunal may grant such leave on such terms as it thinks fit.
(4) The Authority shall send a copy of every amendment and supplementary
statement to the Tribunal.
PART IV – THIRD PARTIES
16. Joinder of parties
If it appears to the Tribunal, whether on the application of a party or on its own motion,
that it is desirable that any person be made a party to the proceedings, the Tribunal may
order such person to be joined as a respondent and may give such directions relating
thereto as may be just, including directions as to the delivery and service of documents.
17. Intervener
(1) In any proceedings bore the Tribunal the Tribunal may, on oral or written request,
in its discretion grant status as an intervener to any person, corporation or group of
persons associated for the pursuit of any of the objectives of the Act and, in particular,
who seeks or seek to enforce rights to a clean and healthy environment as provided in
section 3 of the Act or who may assist it in making a decision which will be in accordance
with the objectives of the Act.
(2) In any proceedings before the Tribunal the Tribunal shall, on oral or written
request, grant status as an intervener to any non-governmental organization or registered
association or society which seeks to enforce rights to a clean and healthy environment as
provided in section 3 of the Act and whose objectives, according to its constitution, to be
duly produced before the Tribunal, are supportive of the objectives of the Act.
(3) A person seeking status as an intervener shall in writing furnish the following
information to the Tribunal—
(a) his full name and address;
(b) a statement of the interest claimed in the subject matter; and
(c) a statement of his position in relation to the appeal or referral.
(4) The decision of the Tribunal shall be binding upon a person granted status as an
intervener, in so far as it relates to matters in respect of which he intervened.
PART V – HEARING
18. Directions and pre-hearing orders
(1) The Tribunal may at any time, on the application of a party or of its own motion,
give such directions (including directions for the furnishing of further particulars or
supplementary statements) as are necessary to enable the parties to prepare for the
hearing or to assist the Tribunal to determine the issues.
(2) No person shall be compelled to give any evidence or produce any document or
other material that he could not be compelled to give or produce on a trial of an action in a
court of law.
(3) In exercising the powers conferred by this rule, the Tribunal shall take into account
the need to protect any matter that relates to intimate personal or financial circumstances,
is commercially sensitive, consist of information communicated or obtained in confidence
or concerns national security.

-- 127 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 128
(4) An application by a party for directions shall be made in writing to the Tribunal and,
unless it is accompanied by the written consent of all the parties, shall be served by the
Tribunal on any other party who might be affected by such directions.
(5) If any such other party objects to the directions sought, the Tribunal shall consider
the objection and, if it considers it necessary for the determination of the application, shall
give the parties an opportunity of appearing before it.
19. Failure to comply with directions
If any directions given to a party under this Part of these Rules are not complied with
by such a party, the Tribunal may, in addition to other powers available to it before or at
the hearing, dismiss the whole or part of the appeal or, as the case may be, strike out the
whole or part of a respondent’s reply and, where appropriate, direct that a party shall be
debarred from participating in the appeal altogether:
Provided that the Tribunal shall not so dismiss or strike out or give such a direction
unless it has sent notice to the party who has not complied with the direction giving him an
opportunity to show cause why it should not do so.
20. Varying or setting aside of directions
Where a person to whom a direction (including any summons) is addressed had no
opportunity of objecting to the making of such direction, he may apply to the Tribunal to
very it or set it aside, but the Tribunal shall not so do without first notifying the person who
applied for the directions and considering any representations made by him.
21. Subpoenas and orders
(1) A person to be summoned under section 127(1) of the Act to attend and give
evidence shall be given at least seven days’ notice of the hearing unless he has informed
the Tribunal that he accepts such shorter notice as he has been given.
(2) No person, other than the appellant or a respondent, shall be required in
obedience to a summons to attend and give evidence or to produce any document except
on the undertaking that the necessary expenses of his attendance will be paid or tendered
to him.
22. Place and time of hearing
(1) The Tribunal shall, with due regard to the convenience of the parties, fix the date,
time and place of the oral hearing, and not less than twenty-one days before the date so
fixed, send to each party a notice of the hearing at such date, time and place.
(2) The notice of hearing shall include the following—
(a) a statement of the purpose of the hearing and a reasonably precise
statement of the issues involved;
(b) information and guidance, in a form approved by the Chairman, as to
attendance at the hearing of the parties and witnesses, the bringing of
documents, and the right of representation by another person;
(c) a statement of the right of the parties to ask for and to receive reasons in
writing for decision of the Tribunal;
(d) a statement explaining the possible consequences of non-attendance and
of the right of an appellant, and of any respondent who has presented a
reply, who does not attend and is not represented, to make representations
in writing.

-- 128 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
129 [Issue 1]
(3) The Tribunal may alter the time and place of any oral hearing and the Tribunal
shall give the parties not less than seven days notice of any such alteration:
Provided that any altered hearing date shall not be before the date notified under
paragraph (1) of this rule.
(4) The Tribunal may from time to time, on its own motion or on application made
before it, adjourn the oral hearing and, if the time and place of the adjourned hearing are
announced before the adjournment, no further notice shall be required.
(5) Subject to this rule, the Tribunal may, if it thinks fit to do so, visit any site with or
without any or all of the parties, and may hold an oral hearing at such site on the day of
such visit.
(6) The Tribunal shall transact business from Monday to Friday of every week, except
on official public holidays, with official business hours as follows—
(a) 8.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m.; and
(b) 2.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m.
23. Public notice of hearings
The Tribunal shall provide for public inspection, at the principal office of the Tribunal
and at the place where a hearing is to be held, a list of all appeals for which an oral
hearing is to be held and of the time and place fixed for the hearing.
24. Exclusions of persons disrupting proceedings
Without prejudice to any other powers it may have the Tribunal may exclude from the
hearing or part of it, any person whose conduct has disrupted or is likely, in the opinion of
the Tribunal, to disrupt the hearing.
25. Failure of parties to attend hearing
(1) If a party fails to attend or be represented at hearing of which he has been duly
notified, the Tribunal may—
(a) unless it is satisfied that there is sufficient reason for such absence, hear
and determine the appeal in the party’s absence; or
(b) adjourn the hearing,
and may in either event make such order as to costs and expenses as it thinks fit.
(2) Before deciding to dispose of any appeal in the absence of a party, the Tribunal
shall consider any representations in writing submitted by that party in response to the
notice of hearing and, for the purpose of this rule, the appeal and any reply shall be
treated as representations in writing.
(3) Where an appellant has failed to attend a hearing of which he was duly notified,
and the Tribunal has disposed of the appeal, no fresh appeal may be made by the
appellant to the Tribunal against the same disputed decision without the prior leave of the
Tribunal.
26. Procedure at hearing
(1) At the beginning of the hearing the Chairman shall explain the order of proceeding
which the Tribunal proposes to adopt.
(2) Subject to this rule, the Tribunal shall conduct the hearing in such manner as it
considered most suitable to the clarification of the issues before it and generally to the just
handling of the proceeding and shall, so far as appears to it appropriate, seek to avoid
legal technicality and formality in its proceedings.

-- 129 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 130
(3) The parties shall be heard in such order as the Tribunal shall determine, and shall
be entitled to give evidence, to call witnesses, to question any witnesses and to address
the Tribunal both on the evidence and generally on the subject matter of the appeal.
(4) Evidence before the Tribunal may be given orally or, if the Tribunal so orders, by
affidavit or written statement, but the Tribunal may at any stage of the proceedings require
the personal attendance of any deponent or author of a written statement.
(5) Pursuant to subsection (1) of section 126 of the Act, the Tribunal may receive
evidence of any fact which appears to it to be relevant.
(6) At any hearing the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that it is just and reasonable to do
so, permit a party to rely on grounds not stated in his notice of appeal or, as the case may
be, his reply and to adduce any evidence not presented to the Authority before or at the
time it took the disputed decision.
(7) The Tribunal may require any witness to give evidence on oath or affirmation and
for that purpose it may administer an oath or affirmation in due form.
27. Demonstration and display facilities
The Tribunal may at the request of a party and upon payment of the prescribed fees
provide visual demonstration facilities for the display of any maps, charts or diagrams, or
illustrations of texts and documents, which that party intends to exhibit during the hearing.
28. Judicial notice
(1) The Tribunal may take judicial notice—
(a) of facts that are publicly known and that may be judicially noticed by a court
of law; and
(b) of generally recognized facts and any information, opinion, policy or rule
that is within its specialized knowledge.
(2) Before the Tribunal takes notice of any fact, information, opinion, policy or
unwritten rule other than what may be judicially noticed by a court, it shall notify the parties
of its intention and afford them a reasonable opportunity to make representations with
respect thereto.
29. Determination of interlocutory matters
Interlocutory matters arising in the course of proceedings before the Tribunal may be
determined by the Chairman or any one legally qualified member sitting alone.
30. Opportunity to be heard or cross-examine
The Tribunal shall grant to any party—
(a) a reasonable opportunity to be heard, to submit evidence and to make
representations; and
(b) a reasonable opportunity to cross-examine witnesses, to the extent
necessary to ensure a fair hearing.
31. Change of advocate
(1) At the hearing of an appeal or a referral and at any stage of the proceedings a
party represented by an advocate may change his advocate upon giving notice to the
Tribunal, which notice shall also be served on the other party or parties.

-- 130 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
131 [Issue 1]
PART VI – DETERMINATION APPEAL
32. Failure to reply and no contest
If—
(a) no reply is received by the Tribunal within twenty-one days or such longer
time as the Tribunal may allow; or
(b) the Authority states in writing that it does not resist the appeal, or in writing
withdraws its opposition to the appeal,
and if there is no other subsisting opposition to that appeal, the Tribunal may determine
the appeal on the basis of the notice and grounds of appeal without proceeding to a
hearing.
33. Withdrawal of appeal
(1) The appellant may, with the leave of the Tribunal and upon such terms as to costs
or otherwise as the Tribunal may direct, at any time before or at the hearing of the appeal,
withdraw his appeal; whereupon the appeal shall be marked as terminated.
(2) Where an appeal is withdrawn pursuant to this rule, no appeal shall be entertained
by the Tribunal in relation to the same decision unless the Tribunal, for good reason
shown, otherwise determines.
34. Preliminary issues
(1) The Tribunal may order any question of fact or law which is in issue in the appeal
to be determined at a preliminary hearing.
(2) If, in the opinion of the Tribunal, the determination of that question disposes of the
whole appeal, the Tribunal may treat the preliminary hearing as the hearing of the appeal
and may make such order by way of disposing of the appeal as the Tribunal thinks fit.
(3) If the parties so agree in writing, the Tribunal may determine the question without
an oral hearing but, in any such case, the Tribunal may not at the same time dispose of
the appeal unless the parties have also agreed in writing that it may do so and have had
an opportunity of making representations in writing.
(4) The decision of a Tribunal in relation to a preliminary issue may be given orally at
the end of the hearing, or may be reserved, but in either event (and whether there has
been a hearing on the preliminary issue or not) shall be recorded forthwith in a document
which shall also contain a statement of reasons for its decision, and which shall be signed
and dated by the Chairman.
(5) The Tribunal shall send a copy of the document recording the decision on the
preliminary issue to each party.
35. Power to determine appeal without hearing
(1) The Tribunal may, by consent in writing of all the parties to an appeal, determine
the appeal, or any particular issue, without an oral hearing.
(2) The provisions of rule 25(2) and rule 26(5) shall apply to the determination of an
appeal in accordance with this rule.
36. Consolidation of appeals
The Tribunal may, in its discretion and after giving the parties concerned an
opportunity to be heard, order the consolidation of the hearing of any appeal before it,
where notices of appeal have been given in respect of the same matter or in respect of
several interest in the same subject in dispute or which involve the same issue.

-- 131 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 132
37. Decision of Tribunal
(1) A decision of a Tribunal may be taken by a majority and the decision shall record
whether it was unanimous or taken by a majority.
(2) The decision of the Tribunal may be given orally at the end of the hearing or may
be reserved and, in either event (and whether there has been a hearing or not) shall be
reduced to writing and, save in the case of a decision by consent, shall also contain a
statement of the reasons (in summary form) for the decision, and shall be signed and
dated by the Chairman and every member who heard the matter:
Provided that a dissenting decision may be pronounced separately by any member
who wrote it and shall be dated and signed by such member.
(3) Subject to paragraph (4), every document containing a decision referred to in this
rule shall, as soon as may be, be entered in the register and the Tribunal shall send a
copy of the entry to each party.
(4) Where any such decision refers to any evidence that has been heard in private,
only such summary of the decision, omitting such material, shall be entered in the register
as the Tribunal may direct, but copies of the complete decision document shall be sent to
the parties together with a copy of the entry.
(5) Every copy of an entry sent to the parties under this rule shall be accompanied by
a notification indicating the rights of the parties under section 130 of the Act and of the
time within which and place at which such rights may be exercised.
(6) Except where a decision is announced at the end of the hearing, it shall be treated
as having been made on the date on which a copy of the document recording it is sent to
the appellant.
(7) Where a final decision or order has been made by the Tribunal in respect of any
appeal or referral the Tribunal shall, within thirty days thereafter, cause to be published—
(a) in the Kenya Gazette; and
(b) where the matter is of public importance, in at least in one newspaper of
national circulation,
a summary thereof stating the names of the parties, the nature of the appeal or referral
and the date and place of the decision:
Provided that the Tribunal shall have regard to the need to preserve the
confidentiality of any evidence heard in private in accordance with these Rules.
38. Reasons for decisions
The Tribunal shall give reasons for all its decisions, and each of any such decisions
shall include—
(a) a statement of the findings of fact made from the evidence adduced,
including, where applicable, any relevant government policy; and
(b) a statement of the laws and rules of law applied, and the interpretation
thereof.
39. Order for costs and expenses
(1) The Tribunal shall not normally make an order awarding costs and expenses, but
may, subject to paragraph (2), make such an order—
(a) against a party, including a party which has withdrawn its appeal or reply, if
it is of the opinion that that party has acted frivolously or vexatiously or that
his conduct in making, pursuing or resisting an appeal was wholly
unreasonable;

-- 132 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
133 [Issue 1]
(b) against the Authority, where it considers that the decision against which the
appeal is brought was wholly unreasonable; or
(c) as respects any costs or expenses incurred, or any allowances paid, as a
result of a postponement or adjournment of a hearing at the request of a
party.
(2) No order shall be made under paragraph (1) against a party without first giving that
party an opportunity of making representations against the making of the order.
(3) Any costs required by an order under this rule to be taxed shall be assessed by
the Tribunal.
PART VII – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
40. Chairman to act for Tribunal
(1) The Tribunal may authorize the Chairman to do any act required or authorised by
these rules to be done by the Tribunal, not being an act which is required by the Act to be
done by the Tribunal itself.
(2) In the event of the death or incapacity of the Chairman following the decision of the
Tribunal in any matter, the functions of the Chairman for the completion of the
proceedings, including a review of any decision, may be exercised by any other person
duly acting as chairman of the Tribunal.
(3) The Chairman may be instrument in writing delegate to any officer of the Tribunal
any of his powers which are not required by the Act to be performed by him personally.
41. Additional powers of Tribunal
The Tribunal may, at its discretion—
(a) if both or all the parties to an appeal agree in writing upon the terms on
which an appeal or issue should be decided, confirm the agreement
reached by such parties and decide accordingly;
(b) at any stage of proceedings before it, by order strike out or amend any
notice, reply, supplementary statement or written representation on the
grounds that it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious;
(c) at any stage of proceedings before it, by order strike out any appeal for
want of prosecution:
Provided that, before making any order under paragraph (c) or (d), the Tribunal
shall send notice to the party against whom it is proposed that any such order should be
made, giving him an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be made.
42. Correcting irregularities
(1) Any irregularity resulting from failure to comply with any provisions of these Rules
or of any direction of the Tribunal before the Tribunal has reached its decision shall not of
itself render any proceedings void.
(2) Where any such irregularity comes to the attention of the Tribunal, the Tribunal
may (and shall, if it considers that any person may have been prejudiced by the
irregularity) give such directions as it thinks just before reaching its decision to cure or
waive the irregularity.
(3) Clerical mistakes in any document recording a direction or decision of the
Chairman or the Tribunal, or errors arising in such a document from an accidental slip or
omission, may be corrected by the Chairman by certificate under his hand or by the
Tribunal.

-- 133 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 134
43. Proof of documents and certification of decisions
(1) Any document purporting to be a document duly executed or issued by the
Chairman on behalf of the Tribunal shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to be a
document so executed or issued as the case may be.
(2) A document purporting to be certified by the chairman to be a true copy of any
entry of a decision in a register kept in pursuance of these Rules shall, unless the contrary
is proved, be sufficient evidence of the entry and of matters contained therein.
44. Service or delivery of documents
(1) Any document required or authorised by these Rules to be sent or delivered to, or
served on, any person shall be duly sent, delivered or served on that person—
(a) if it is sent to him at his proper address by registered post or by certificate of
posting;
(b) if it is sent to him at that address by telex, facsimile transmission or other
similar means which produce a document containing a text of the
communication, in which event the document shall be regarded as sent
when it is received in a legible form; or
(c) if it is delivered to him or left with some apparently responsible person at his
last known address.
(2) If a notice of appeal is sent by registered post or certificate of posting, it shall be
treated as if it had been received by the addressee seven days following the date on
which it is received for dispatch by the Post Office.
(3) Any document required or authorised to be sent or delivered to, or served on, an
incorporated company or body shall be duly sent, delivered or served if sent or delivered
to or served on the director, manager, secretary or clerk of the company or body.
(4) The proper address of any person to or on whom any such document is to be sent,
delivered or served shall, in the case of any incorporated company or body be that of the
registered or principal office of the company or body and, in any other case, shall be the
last known place of abode or business of the person in question.
45. Substituted service
If any person to or on whom any document is required to be sent, delivered or served
for the purpose of these Rules cannot be found or has died and has no known personal
representative, or is out of Kenya, or if for any other reason service on him cannot be
readily effected, the Chairman or the Tribunal may, on application, dispense with service
on such person or may make an order for substituted service on that or another person in
such other form (whether by advertisement in a newspaper or otherwise) as the Chairman
or the Tribunal may think fit.
46. Language
(1) The language of the Tribunal shall be English or Swahili:
Provided that the Tribunal may, at its discretion, allow an appeal lodged in any local
language spoken in Kenya by persons or a community directly affected by the subject
matter of the appeal, if such persons or community cannot immediately obtain a
translation but undertake to do so within a reasonable time.
(2) The Tribunal shall, taking into account all the circumstances, grant the assistance
of a competent interpreter free of charge to a party or witness who does not understand or
speak the language used at the hearing or who is deaf.
(3) The rulings of the Tribunal shall be prepared in the English language but may be
translated, on request by a party, into the Swahili language.

-- 134 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
135 [Issue 1]
47. Filing Fees
There shall be paid to the Tribunal such filing and other fees, including fees for service
by the Tribunal of any notice or process, as shall be prescribed by the Minister:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it considered it to be in the interest of justice, or
on grounds of financial hardship on the part of the appellant waive all or part of the filing
fees payable in any appeal.
48. Prescribed Forms
The Tribunal may from time to time design and issue free of charge such prescribed
forms as it may deem necessary for the purposes of filing appeals or replies and for any
interlocutory matters.
49. Recording of proceedings
(1) The Chairman shall take or cause to be taken notes of all proceedings before the
Tribunal or may order that the record of any proceedings before it shall be taken by
shorthand notes or tape-recorded or, at the discretion of the Tribunal, electronically
recorded.
(2) A verbatim record of every hearing shall be made by the Tribunal, and copies of
the transcript thereof shall be circulated to all members of the Tribunal and, on request, to
any party to the hearing.

-- 135 of 302 --

-- 136 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
137 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL (PREVENTION OF POLLUTION IN COASTAL ZONE AND
OTHER SEGMENTS OF THE ENVIRONMENT) REGULATIONS, 2003
[L.N. 159/2003.]
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental (Prevention of Pollution in
Coastal Zone and other Segments of the Environment) Regulations, 2003.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“chemical” means a chemical substance in any form whether by itself or in a
mixture or preparation, whether manufactured or delivered from nature and for the
purposes of the act includes industrial chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers or drugs;
“certificate” means a certificate issued under these Regulations by a Certified
Port Waste Reception Facility;
“coastal zone” means any area declared to be a protected coastal zone under
section 55 of the Act;
“discharge” in relation to harmful substances or effluents containing such
substances, means any release howsoever caused from a ship and includes any
escape, disposal, spilling, leaking, pumping, emitting, or emptying but does not
include—
(a) release of harmful substances directly arising from the exploration,,
exploitation and associated offshore processing of seabed mineral
resources; or
(b) release of harmful substances for purposes of legitimate scientific research
into pollution abatement or control;
“MARPOL” refers to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution
from Ships 1973 as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto and Protocols
and Annexes thereto;
“oil” includes—
(a) crude oil, refined oil, diesel oil, fuel oil, lubricating oil; and
(b) any other description of oil which may be described;
“oil mixture” means a mixture with oil contents;
“Oil Record Book” refers to a book carried on board ships which contain entries
on machinery space operations, cargo and ballast operations;
“pollutant” which may include any substance whether liquid, solid or gaseous
which—
(a) may directly or indirectly alter the qualify of any element of the receiving
environment;
(b) is hazardous or potentially hazardous to human health or the environment;
and includes objectionable odours, radioactivity, noise, temperature change
or physical, chemical or biological change to any segment or element of the
environment;
“Port Waste Reception Facility” means any facility, which is fixed, floating or
mobile and capable of receiving ship-generated waste or cargo residues and which is
managed and operated by the Kenya Ports Authority or any other persons designated
as such by the Kenya Ports Authority and “Certified Port Waste Reception Facility”
shall be construed accordingly;
“ship” includes every description of vessel or craft or floating structure; and

-- 137 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 138
“territorial waters” means territorial waters provided under section 3 if the
Maritime Zones Act (Cap. 371).
3. (1) No ship or any other person in Kenya shall be allowed to discharge any hazardous
substance, chemical, oil or oily mixture into the territorial waters of Kenya or any segment
of the environment contrary to the provisions of these Regulations.
(2) All ships in the territorial waters of Kenya shall off-load oil or oily mixture, sludge,
bilge water, ballast water, waste and sewage to the certified Port Waste Reception Facility
at the Port of Mombasa.
4. These Regulations shall not apply—
(a) in circumstances where it is necessary to secure the safety of human life or
of ships or other man-made structures at sea in cases of force majeure
caused by stress of weather, or in any case which constitutes a danger to
human life or a real threat to ships, or other man-made structures at sea, if
dumping or incineration at sea appears to be the only way of averting the
threat and if there is every probability that the damage consequent upon
such dumping or incineration at sea will be less than would otherwise occur;
(b) in cases of emergencies posing an unacceptable threat to human health,
safety, or the marine environment and admitting of no other feasible
solution;
(c) to ships belonging to the Government which are engaged in Government
non-commercial service; and
(d) to warships, naval auxiliary or other ships owned or operated by a MARPOL
member of State and used for the time being only on Government non-
commercial service.
5. Every ship shall be required to carry an Oil Record Book, which shall detail entries on
machinery space operations, cargo and ballast operations in accordance with the
provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act (Cap. 389).
6. (1) All ships shall be required to obtain a certificate issued by a Certified Port Waste
Reception Facility in accordance with MARPOL.
(2) A certificate, in the prescribed form set out in the Schedule, issued pursuant to
subparagraph (1) shall be accepted and regarded for all purposes under these
Regulations as having the same validity as a corresponding certificate issued under
MARPOL.
(3) No ship calling at any port or offshore terminal in Kenya shall be allowed to leave
the port without producing a valid certificate of discharge of waste issued by a Certified
Port Waste Reception Facility pursuant to this Regulation.
7. A ship to which these Regulations apply may, in any port or offshore terminal in
Kenya, be subject to inspection by officers appointed or authorised by the Director-
General of the National Environment Management Authority for the purpose of verifying
whether the ship has discharged any harmful substances in violation of these Regulations.
8. Whenever visible traces of oil are observed on or below the surface of the water in the
vicinity of a ship or its wake, the Director-General of the National Environment
Management Authority shall promptly carry out an investigation of the facts bearing on the
issue whether there has been a violation of these Regulations.

-- 138 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
139 [Issue 1]
9. Any person who contravenes the provisions of these Regulations, is guilty of an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to imprisonment for a term of not more than
eighteen months or to a fine of not more than three hundred and fifty thousand shillings or
to both such fine and imprisonment.
SCHEDULE
[Regulation 6.]
PORT WASTE DISPOSAL CERTIFICATE
Issued by a certified Port Waste Reception Facility at the port of Mombasa under the Environmental
(Prevention of Pollution in Coastal Zone and other Segments of the Environment) Regulations, 2003
Name of ship Distinctive number or
letters
Port of registry Gross tonnage
Type of ship
Type of waste discharge Quantity of waste
THIS IS TO CERTIFY:
That the ship has discharged all of its oil and oily mixture, waste, garbage and sewage in
accordance with the Environmental (Prevention of Pollution in Coastal Zone and other Segments of
the Environment) Regulations, 2003
This certificate is issued by ...................................................................................................................
Issued at ...............................................................................................................................................
(Place of issue of certificate)
(Date of issue) ....................................................
.............................................................................
(Signature of duly authorized official
issuing the certificate)
.............................................................................
(Seal or stamp of the authority, as appropriate)

-- 139 of 302 --

-- 140 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
141 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT (LAKE NAIVASHA MANAGEMENT PLAN)
ORDER, 2004
[L.N. 108/2004.]
1. This Order may be cited as the Environmental Management (Lake Naivasha
Management Plan) Order, 2004
2. The Management Plan set out in the Schedule shall be applicable to the Lake
Naivasha Ecosystem.
SCHEDULE
THE LAKE NAIVASHA MANAGEMENT PLAN
The Lake Naivasha Management Plan (hereinafter referred to as “the Plan”) is a
community-based initiative, spear-headed by the local community and supported by other
stakeholders and institutions with common concerns and commitment to the sustainable
management and development of the lake ecosystem.
The Plan has been developed to ensure that adverse impacts on the lake ecosystem
are minimized and corrected while addressing identified conservation issues for which
there is a large degree of consensus.
The Plan shall be implemented by a special committee known as the Lake Naivasha
Management Committee (hereinafter referred to as “the Committee”), comprising key
stakeholders and institutions through the development and implementation of sectoral
codes of conduct in consultation with various sectors. The Committee shall ensure
adoption of, and compliance with the codes of conduct.
The Plan emphasises that all developments within the declared Lake Naivasha
Ramsar Site and the lake’s catchment shall be subject to Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA), as per the provisions of the Environmental Management and Co-
ordination Act, 1999.
The Plan is a dynamic tool that shall be subject to periodic reviews, depending on
emerging issues and new knowledge.
The Plan addresses sustainable management issues of the Lake Naivasha
environment and the natural resources within the declared Lake Naivasha Ramsar Site
and the wider catchment as set out here below:
Water Use
The Plan shall regulate and control water use by the following measures—
(a) determination of modalities of water allocation and establishment of water
use policy;
(b) utilization of all available information to update the water budget;
(c) monitoring the lake levels, rainfall, river flows and evaporation to improve the
water budget database;
(d) undertaking a hydrological study on the water budget of the lake;
(e) institute metering for water abstractions as provided for in the water permits;
(f) encouragement of use of information from weather stations to optimise water
use;
(g) controlling the expansion of water abstraction through the licensing process;

-- 141 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 142
(h) reviewing water permits and establishing the current levels of water
abstraction and efficiency of water usage;
(i) ensuring that the Committee is represented in the water licensing process;
(j) encouraging conservation of water through appropriate technology choices,
especially in irrigation and re-use of waste water;
(k) developing suitable incentives for water conservation methods to support the
Plan;
(l) promotion of a study on Nakuru water supply with a view to controlling the
water abstraction from Lake Naivasha’s inflow rivers;
(m) determining the hydrological impact of forest degradation in the catchment
and other watershed activities on water resources;
(n) supporting the provisions of the national water policy and the Water Act, 2002
(Cap. 372); and
(o) avoiding watering livestock directly from the Lake except at designated public
access points because it degrades the shoreline and increases nutrient levels
in the Lake.
HABITAT MANAGEMENT AND NATURE CONSERVATION
The Lake Zone (the Area within the Moi North and South Lake Roads)
Through the Plan, the following actions shall be undertaken—
(a) the Papyrus fringe shall be restored and allowed to grow naturally all around
the Lake because of its water purifying effects and as a habitat for wildlife;
(b) the natural vegetation shall be allowed to regenerate and form a buffer zone
of at least 100m back from the land-side edge of the Papyrus fringe or from
the shoreline where no papyrus exists;
(c) the distribution and health of floating weeds and their biological control
agents shall be monitored and appropriate corrective measures taken on any
adverse trends;
(d) the natural establishment of the Acacia woodland;
(e) stock watering points shall be provided at strategic locations on the land side
of the riparian boundary for large herds including along stock routes;
(f) livestock shall be allowed controlled access to the lake for water only through
the designated public corridors;
(g) stock holding points, grazing, night bomas or livestock dips and spray races
on riparian land shall be prohibited;
(h) encouragement of the planting of indigenous vegetation;
(i) re-vegetation of degraded areas in order to conserve the soil moisture and
ground water conditions;
(j) security measures shall be undertaken to prevent illegal activities and
damage to Papyrus and buffer zones;
(k) the Committee shall propose to the Naivasha Municipal Council by-laws
restricting grazing of cattle and other stock in riparian reserve;
(l) the reclamation of flooded land or building of dykes which inhibit the Lake’s
natural level shall be prohibited;
(m) all agricultural activities on riparian land shall be prohibited;
(n) all structures except those approved by the Committee on riparian land, shall
be prohibited;

-- 142 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
143 [Issue 1]
(o) the planting of suitable indigenous fuel wood crops and screens for unsightly
developments shall be encouraged; and
(p) the cultivation of reverse slopes away from the Lake shall be encouraged.
The Catchment and Rivers
Through collaborative initiatives with authorities in the catchment areas, the Plan
shall undertake the following measures—
(a) conduct an environmental appraisal of the watershed including erosion
hazards and assist in evolving a District Forestry Action Plan;
(b) ensure that Environmental Impact Assessments are done for major water
impoundments and that the Committee participates in their approval;
(c) support the rehabilitation of degraded and damaged areas;
(d) ensure that cultivation on the river banks is stopped;
(e) control tree harvesting and charcoal burning;
(f) collect and collate baseline data on the integrity of the catchment area;
(g) promote afforestation efforts in the catchment area; and
(h) discourage unplanned settlements and unsustainable land subdivision.
Species Management
The health of plant and animal species is a good indicator of the health of the Lake
and the Plan shall seek to—
(a) monitor the food chain and support studies of raptors, etc.;
(b) monitor the composition and abundance of submerged vegetation in the lake;
(c) protect sensitive areas of the habitat, especially breeding, feeding and resting
sites and fragile ecosystems;
(d) preserve and where necessary establish additional wildlife corridors;
(e) carry out regular water bird counts twice each year;
(f) stop introduction of alien invasive species without Environmental Impact
Assessments on the ecology of the lake; and
(g) study and monitor the impacts of wildlife and livestock on the lake.
Tourism and Recreation
As an important resource of national and international significance, tourism and
recreation facilities must be enhanced and the Plan shall seek to—
(a) monitor the impacts of tourist activity and sport fishing on the Lake and its
environs;
(b) improve tourist infrastructure;
(c) provide information to visitors;
(d) facilitate Lake Naivasha to become part of a tourist circuit;
(e) promote awareness among tourists in support of the Plan; and
(f) maintain and enhance the aesthetic value of the Lake.
Fisheries
The Lake fishery has the potential for greater production and the Plan shall promote
the fisheries potential through the following measures—
(a) monitoring and collecting accurate data on the commercial catch necessary
for the calculation of Maximum Sustainable Yield;

-- 143 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 144
(b) designing an appropriate management strategy to eliminate illegal fishing,
and the enforcement of fishing regulations and the training of fishermen;
(c) enhancement of fish production (including introduction of new species and
aquaculture development after suitable Environmental Impact Assessment);
(d) gazettement of existing fish landing sites and establishing additional fish
landing grounds;
(e) instituting proper management for fish landing sites;
(f) establishing regulations to protect fish breeding areas, especially within, and
100 meters out from, the lakeside edge of the Papyrus fringe;
(g) setting up appropriate sites for fuelling boats to minimise oil spills;
(h) involving fisherfolk in the licensing process, data collection and fisheries
management;
(i) regulating the number of fishers based on the recommendation of research
findings; and
(j) promoting the use of infiltration ponds rather than direct abstraction of water
from the Lake.
Horticulture and Agriculture
Horticulture is an important sector in the Lake Naivasha area and the Plan shall
regulate the sector through the following measures—
(a) the metered abstraction of water and water use by growers;
(b) encouraging practices that avoid or prevent pollutants entering ground and
lake water;
(c) disallowing unacceptable practices on Riparian land;
(d) protecting of the wider environment of Lake Naivasha;
(e) monitoring and self regulating of farm practices within the horticultural sector;
(f) proper storage, handling, application and wise use of chemicals and
pesticides; and
(g) listing of banned or dangerous pesticides and those that are potentially
harmful to wetlands.
Waste Disposal
The Plan shall ensure proper disposal of wastewater and other waste products
through the following measures—
(a) facilitating the rehabilitation of the Naivasha town sewage treatment works;
(b) developing a constructed wetland around the existing treatment works to
purify its output and prevent environmental damage in the event of failure of
the system;
(c) regulating the use and sitting of septic tanks around the Lake;
(d) seeking alternative sources and appropriate technology for recycling common
horticultural materials such as plastics, bamboo and wood;
(e) establishing a mechanism for the disposal of used chemical containers and
plastic;
(f) monitoring the discharge of aerial chemicals and disposal of wastewater
particularly from the urban sewage plant and industrial developments;
(g) disallowing dumping of chemical, vegetative or sewage waste on Riparian
land or in the Lake;

-- 144 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
145 [Issue 1]
(h) disallowing pit latrines, laundry or domestic waste water discharge on
Riparian land; and
(i) promoting proper solid waste management and disposal.
Public Access
The Plan provides for the identification and designation of public access routes as
well as the development of suitable management practices to promote education,
recreation and sustainable use.
However, the following specific areas in and around the Lake shall be protected from
human interference—
(a) breeding sites for wildlife and fish;
(b) sensitive and fragile ecosystems;
(c) areas under a rehabilitation programme;
(d) wildlife corridors between the Parks and the Lake; and
(e) river-mouths and other water inlet points.
Research
The Plan recognises the importance of research, and to ensure maximum return from
research activities it shall be necessary to set up research priorities particularly to—
(a) develop understanding of the water balance;
(b) study the food chain, including plankton and their relationship to ecological
factors;
(c) develop knowledge on fishery resources, including the ecology of Crayfish
black bass and submerged hydrophytes stands; and
(d) monitor impact of socio-economic activities on biological resources, both
within the catchment and the Lake.
Awareness and Information
Success of the Plan shall only be attained when all concerned understand its
objectives and proactively implement its principles. This shall be achieved by—
(a) establishing a data information centre;
(b) mounting awareness campaigns for stakeholders;
(c) producing field guides on the ecology of the Lake;
(d) providing information signboards at the main junctions to direct visitors to
public places of general interest;
(e) promoting the Plan and inviting input;
(f) encouraging the production of Sectoral Codes of Conduct to be added to the
Plan; and
(g) promoting awareness and sense of participation among the Catchment area
community.
Monitoring and Evaluation Programmes
The main objectives of a monitoring programme shall be to provide information to—
(a) establish trends and allow forecasting;
(b) aid in understanding the Lake ecosystem and water budget, and how these
are affected by environmental factors and human activities;
(c) establish reasons for changes in the vitality of the Lake and its environs;

-- 145 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 146
(d) monitor changes in water quality; and
(e) update and measure the success of the Plan.
Physical and Socio-Economic Parameters to be Monitored
Physical parameters to be monitored shall include—
(a) climatic elements, rainfall, evaporation, humidity, air temperature, wind speed
and wind direction;
(b) river flow and lake levels;
(c) lake water quality;
(d) endemic and invasive species, both plants and animals;
(e) wildlife and bird censuses;
(f) fish population and catches;
(g) health of species at the top of the food chain; and
(h) status of the watershed.
Socio-economics parameters to be monitored shall include—
(a) water usage, metering, acreage under irrigation and water permit status;
(b) population, employment, health and education and statistics;
(c) land use, vegetation and soil degradation;
(d) level of awareness and understanding of management issues;
(e) compliance with the Plan; and
(f) catchment activities.
Review of the Plan
The Plan is intended to be dynamic, constantly changing as fresh knowledge
becomes available. In updating the Plan the Committee shall—
(a) assess whether the operational objectives are being achieved;
(b) examine whether the implementation of the Plan is on track;
(c) evaluate the implementation team;
(d) evaluate the cost-effectiveness of the implementation process;
(e) evaluate the validity of previous assumptions in the light of monitoring results;
(f) evaluate public opinion on the Plan; and
(g) evaluate the status of the watershed.
Measure of Success
The main parameters by which the success of the Plan shall be measured include—
(a) status of water quantity and quality;
(b) employment provided and foreign exchange earned;
(c) status of biodiversity;
(d) community awareness and support for management issues and the
Committee;
(e) donor interest and levels of funding;
(f) quality and usefulness of research;
(g) quality of the watershed; and
(h) local community development.

-- 146 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
147 [Issue 1]
The Plan including the background information to the Plan, the facts upon which the
Plan is based and the Codes of Conduct relating to the Plan is deposited at the offices of
the Lake Naivasha Riparian Association (LNRA) and the Director-General, National
Environment Management Authority (NEMA) whose addresses are provided below.
The Chairman
Lake Naivasha Management Committee
P.O. Box 1011, Naivasha 20117, Kenya
Tel: (254) 050 50136
Fax: (254) 050 2021009
The Director-General
National Environment Management Authority (NEMA)
P.O. Box 67839, Nairobi 00200, Kenya
Tel: (254) 020 605526/609013/79
Fax: (254) 020 608997

-- 147 of 302 --

-- 148 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
149 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION (WATER QUALITY)
REGULATIONS, 2006
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Application.
3. Interpretation.
PART II – PROTECTION OF SOURCES OF WATER FOR DOMESTIC USE
4. Prevention of water pollution.
5. Standards for sources of domestic water.
6. Protection of lakes, rivers, streams, springs, wells and other water sources.
7. Bans, restrictions, etc., on use of water sources.
8. Compliance with water quality standards.
9. Water quality monitoring.
PART III – WATER FOR INDUSTRIAL USE AND EFFLUENT DISCHARGE
10. Compliance with industrial standards.
11. Discharge into the aquatic environment.
12. Discharge into the environment.
13. Discharge into public sewers.
14. Discharge monitoring.
15. Review of records.
16. Application for effluent discharge license.
17. Effluent discharge license.
18. License not transferable.
PART IV – WATER FOR AGRICULTURAL USE
19. Use of wastewater for Irrigation.
20. Abstraction from a water body under environmental management plan.
21. Creation of buffer zone for irrigation scheme.
22. Transitional provisions.
23. Compliance with regulations.
PART V – WATER FOR ANY OTHER USES
24. Water pollution prohibition.
25. Recreational uses.
PART VI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
26. Inventory of water bodies.
27. Offences.
28. Fees.

-- 149 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 150
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE – QUALITY STANDARDS FOR SOURCES OF
DOMESTIC WATER
SECOND SCHEDULE – QUALITY MONITORING FOR SOURCES OF
DOMESTIC WATER
THIRD SCHEDULE – STANDARDS FOR EFFLUENT DISCHARGE INTO
THE ENVIRONMENT
FOURTH SCHEDULE – MONITORING GUIDE FOR DISCHARGE INTO THE
ENVIRONMENT
FIFTH SCHEDULE – STANDARDS FOR EFFLUENT DISCHARGE INTO
PUBLIC SEWERS
SIXTH SCHEDULE – MONITORING FOR DISCHARGE OF TREATED
EFFLUENT INTO THE ENVIRONMENT
SEVENTH SCHEDULE – FORMS
EIGHTH SCHEDULE – MICROBIOLOGICAL QUALITY GUIDELINES FOR
WASTEWATER USED IN IRRIGATION
NINTH SCHEDULE – STANDARDS FOR IRRIGATION WATER
TENTH SCHEDULE – QUALITY STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL
WATERS
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE – FEES

-- 150 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
151 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION (WATER QUALITY)
REGULATIONS, 2006
[L.N. 120/2006.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as Environmental Management and Co-ordination
(Water Quality) Regulations, 2006.
2. Application
These Regulations shall apply to drinking water, water used for industrial purposes,
water used for agricultural purposes, water used for recreational purposes, water used for
fisheries and wildlife, and water used for any other purposes.
3. Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Act” means the Environmental Management and Co-ordination Act (No. 8 of
1999);
“Authority” means the National Environment Management Authority established
under section 7 of the Act;
“buffer zone” means distinct or established areas that separate potentially
antagonistic entries between competing users that serve to lessen the danger of
potential conflicts;
“environmental management plan” means the plan referred to under section 42(3)
of the Act;
“designated representative” means any person authorized by the Authority to act
on its behalf;
“ground water” means the water of underground streams, channels, artesian
basins, reservoirs, lakes and other bodies of water in the ground, and includes water in
interstices below the water table;
“Minister” means the Minister for the time being responsible for matters relating to
environment;
“natural water body” means any river, stream, spring, lake, swamp, pond or other
water source flowing in a natural water course;
“pH” means the negative base 10 logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration;
“point sources” means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, conduit, tunnel, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or
other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged;
“resource quality” in relation to a water resource, means the quality of all the
aspects of a water resource including—
(a) the character and condition of the in-stream and riparian habitat;
(b) the characteristics, condition and distribution of the aquatic biota;
(c) the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of the water;

-- 151 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 152
(d) the quantity, pattern, timing, water level and assurance of in-stream flow;
and
(e) the water quality stipulated for the reserves.
PART II – PROTECTION OF SOURCES OF WATER FOR DOMESTIC USE
4. Prevention of water pollution
(1) Every person shall refrain from any act which directly or indirectly causes, or may
cause immediate or subsequent water pollution, and it shall be immaterial whether or not
the water resource was polluted before the enactment of these Regulations.
(2) No person shall throw or cause to flow into or near a water resource any liquid,
solid or gaseous substance or deposit any such substance in or near it, as to cause
pollution.
5. Standards for sources of domestic water
All sources of water for domestic uses shall comply with the standards set out in the
First Schedule to these Regulations.
6. Protection of lakes, rivers, streams, springs, wells and other water sources
No person shall—
(a) discharge, any effluent from sewage treatment works industry or other point
sources without a valid effluent discharge licence issued in accordance with
the provisions of the Act;
(b) abstract ground water or carry out any activity near any lakes, rivers,
streams, springs and wells that is likely to have any adverse impact on the
quantity and quality of the water, without an environmental impact
assessment licence issued in accordance with the provisions of the Act; or
(c) cultivate or undertake any development activity within full width of a river or
stream to a minimum of six metres and a maximum of thirty metres on
either side based on the highest recorded flood level.
7. Bans, restrictions, etc., on use of water sources
The Authority in consultation with the relevant lead agency may impose bans and
restrictions and other measures on the use of sources of water for domestic use in order
to prevent and control their degradation.
8. Compliance with water quality standards
All operators and suppliers of treated water, containerized water and all water vendors
shall comply with the relevant quality standards in force as may be prescribed by the
relevant lead agencies.
9. Water quality monitoring
The Authority in consultation with the relevant lead agency, shall maintain water quality
monitoring for sources of domestic water at least twice every calendar year and such
monitoring records shall be in the prescribed form as set out in the Second Schedule to
these Regulations.
PART III – WATER FOR INDUSTRIAL USE AND EFFLUENT DISCHARGE
10. Compliance with industrial standards
(1) No person shall use water for trade or industrial undertaking unless such person
complies with the standards established by the competent lead agency in regard to that
particular activity.

-- 152 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
153 [Issue 1]
(2) The Authority in consultation with the relevant lead agencies shall ensure
compliance with the said standards.
11. Discharge into aquatic environment
No person shall discharge or apply any poison, toxic, noxious or obstructing matter,
radioactive waste or other pollutants or permit any person to dump or discharge such
matter into the aquatic environment unless such discharge, poison, toxic, noxious or
obstructing matter, radioactive waste or pollutant complies with the standards set out in
the Third Schedule to these Regulations.
12. Discharge into the environment
(1) Every local authority or person operating a sewage system or owner or operator of
any trade or industrial undertaking issued with an effluent discharge license as stipulated
under the Act shall comply with the standards set out in the Fourth Schedule to these
Regulations.
(2) Every local authority or person operating a sewage system or owner or operator of
any trade or industrial undertaking shall be guided by the monitoring guide for discharge
into the environment as set out in the Third Schedule to these Regulations or as the
Authority may prescribe.
13. Discharge into public sewers
Every owner or operator of a trade or industrial undertaking issued with a licence by a
local authority or sewerage systems shall comply with the standards set out in the Fifth
Schedule to these Regulations.
14. Discharge monitoring
(1) Every person who generates and discharges effluent into the environment under a
licence issued under the Act shall carry out daily effluent discharge quality and quantity
monitoring and shall submit quarterly records of such monitoring to the Authority or its
designated representative.
(2) Such discharge monitoring record shall be in the prescribed form set out in the
Sixth Schedule to these Regulations.
15. Review of records
The Authority shall review all monitoring records in order to verify compliance with
these Regulations.
16. Application for effluent discharge licence
(1) An application for an effluent discharge licence under the Act shall be in Form A in
the Seventh Schedule and accompanied by the prescribed fee as set out in the Eleventh
Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) The decision of the Authority together with the reasons thereof shall be
communicated to the applicant within thirty days from the date of submission of the
application.
(3) Where the Authority approves an application for the grant of an effluent discharge
licence, it shall issue an effluent discharge licence within twenty-one days of such
approval.
17. Effluent discharge licence
(1) An effluent discharge licence issued under the Act shall be in Form B set out in the
Seventh Schedule to these Regulations and shall be valid for one year from the date of
issue.

-- 153 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 154
(2) The Authority shall maintain a register for effluent discharge licences as prescribed
in Form C in the Seventh Schedule.
18. Licence not transferable
An effluent discharge licence issued under the Act shall not be transferable.
PART IV – WATER FOR AGRICULTURAL USE
19. Use of wastewater for irrigation
No person shall be permitted to use wastewater for irrigation purposes unless such
water complies with the quality guidelines set out in the Eight Schedule to these
Regulations.
20. Abstraction from a water body under environmental management plan
Where the Minister, in exercise of his powers conferred under section 42(3) has issued
an order for the management of a natural water body, no person shall abstract water from
such body for irrigational purposes unless such water meets the standards set out in the
Ninth Schedule to these Regulations.
21. Creation of buffer zone for irrigation scheme
Any owner or operator of an irrigation scheme shall create a buffer zone of at least fifty
metres in width between the irrigation scheme and the natural water body into which such
irrigation scheme discharges its waters.
22. Transitional provisions
All owners or operators of existing irrigation schemes shall within ninety days upon the
coming into force of these Regulations take necessary steps to comply with these
Regulations.
23. Compliance with regulations
The Authority in consultation with the relevant lead agency shall take all necessary
measures to ensure compliance with these Regulations.
PART V – WATER FOR ANY OTHER USES
24. Water pollution prohibition
No person shall discharge or apply any poison, toxic, noxious or obstructing matter,
radioactive wastes, or other pollutants or permit any person to dump or discharge any
such matter into water meant for fisheries, wildlife, recreational purposes or any other
uses.
25. Recreational uses
No person shall use or allow to be used any natural water body for recreational
purposes unless the water body meets the quality standards for recreational standards as
set out in Tenth Schedule to these Regulations.
PART VI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
26. Inventory of water bodies
Within three years from the date of commencement of these Regulations, the Authority
shall prepare and maintain an inventory of all natural water bodies and take measures
including the development of environmental management plans, to prevent and control
degradation of such sources.

-- 154 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
155 [Issue 1]
27. Offences
(1) Any person who contravenes any of these Regulations commits an offence and
shall be liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand shillings.
(2) In addition to the above, the court may give such other orders as are provided for
under the Act.
28. Fees
All applications and licences shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees as set out in
the Eleventh Schedule to these Regulations.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Rule 5.]
QUALITY STANDARDS FOR SOURCES OF DOMESTIC WATER
Parameter Guide Value (maximum allowable)
pH 6.5–8.5
Suspended solids 30 (mg/L)
Nitrate – NO 3 10 (mg/L)
Ammonia – NH 3 0.5 (mg/L)
Nitrite – NO 2 3 (mg/L)
Total dissolved solids 1200 (mg/L)
E.coli Nil/100 ml
Fluoride 1.5 (mg/L)
Phenols Nil (mg/L)
Arsenic 0.01 (mg/L)
Cadmium 0.01 (mg/L)
Lead 0.05 (mg/L)
Selenium 0.01 (mg/L)
Copper 0.05 (mg/L)
Zinc 1.5 (mg/L)
Alkyl benzyl sulphonates 0.5 (mg/L)
Permanganate value (PV) 1.0 (mg/L)
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Rule 9.]
WATER QUALITY MONITORING FOR SOURCES OF DOMESTIC WATER
Name of water source ..........................................................................................................................
Sample Number ....................................................................................................................................
Description of sample (untreated) ........................................................................................................
Date and time sample received in laboratory .......................................................................................
Date and time sample was examined ...................................................................................................

-- 155 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 156
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
PARAMETER RESULTS
Observed value Guide value (maximum
allowable)
pH 6.5–8.5
Suspended solids 30 (mg/L)
Nitrate – NO 3 10 (mg/L)
Ammonia – NH 3 0.5 (mg/L)
Nitrite – NO 2 3 (mg/L)
Total Dissolved Solids 1200 (mg/L)
E.coli Nil/100 ml
Fluoride 1.5 (mg/L)
Phenols Nil (mg/L)
Arsenic 0.01 (mg/L)
Cadmium 0.01 (mg/L)
Lead 0.05 (mg/L)
Selenium 0.01 (mg/L)
Copper 0.05 (mg/L)
Zinc 1.5 (mg/L)
Alkyl benzyl sulphonates 0.5 (mg/L)
Permanganate value 1.0 (mg/L)
Remarks ...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
THIRD SCHEDULE
[Rules 11 and 12.]
STANDARDS FOR EFFLUENT DISCHARGE INTO THE ENVIRONMENT
Parameter Maximum Allowable
(Limits)
1,1,1-trichloroethane (mg/L) 3
1,1,2-trichloethane (mg/L) 0.06
1,1-dichloroethylene 0.2
1,2-dichloroethane 0.04
1,3-dichloropropene (mg/L) 0.02

-- 156 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
157 [Issue 1]
THIRD SCHEDULE—continued
Parameter Maximum Allowable
(Limits)
Alkyl Mercury compounds Nd
Ammonia, ammonium compounds, NO3 compounds and NO2 compounds
(Sum total of ammonia-N times 4 plus nitrate-N and Nitrite-N) (mg/L)

Arsenic (mg/L) 0.02
Arsenic and its compounds (mg/L) 0.1
Benzene (mg/L) 0.1
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD 5days at 20 ºC) (mg/L) 30
Boron (mg/L) 1.0
Boron and its compounds – non-marine (mg/L) 10
Boron and its compounds – marine (mg/L) 30
Cadmium (mg/L) 0.01
Cadmium and its compounds (mg/L) 0.1
Carbon tetrachloride 0.02
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD mg/L) 50
Chromium VI (mg/L) 0.05
Chloride (mg/L) 250
Chlorine free residue 0.10
Chromium total 2
cis-1,2-dichloro ethylene 0.4
Copper (mg/L) 1.0
Dichloromethane (mg/L) 0.2
Dissolved iron (mg/L) 10
Dissolved Manganese (mg/L) 10
E.coli (counts/100 ml) Nil
Fluoride (mg/L) 1.5
Fluoride and its compounds (marine and non-marine) (mg/L) 8
Lead (mg/L) 0.01
Lead and its compounds (mg/L) 0.1
n-Hexane extracts (animal and vegetable fats) (mg/L) 30
n-Hexane extracts (mineral oil) (mg/L) 5
Oil and grease Nil
Organo-Phosphorus compounds (parathion, methyl parathion, methyl
demeton and Ethyl parantrophenyl phenylphosphorothroate, EPN only)
(mg/L) 1.0

-- 157 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 158
THIRD SCHEDULE—continued
Parameter Maximum Allowable
(Limits)
Polychlorinated biphenyls, PCBs (mg/L) 0.003
pH (Hydrogen ion activity – marine) 5.0–9.0
pH (Hydrogen ion activity – non-marine) 6.5–8.5
Phenols (mg/L) 0.001
Selenium (mg/L) 0.01
Selenium and its compounds (mg/L) 0.1
Hexavalent Chromium VI compounds (mg/L) 0.5
Sulphide (mg/L) 0.1
Simazine (mg/L) 0.03
Total Suspended Solids, (mg/L) 30
Tetrachloroethylene (mg/L) 0.1
Thiobencarb (mg/L) 0.1
Temperature (in degrees celious) based on ambient temperature ±3
Thiram (mg/L) 0.06
Total Coliforms (counts/100 ml) 30
Total Cyanogen (mg/L) Nd
Total Nickel (mg/L) 0.3
Total Dissolved solids (mg/L) 1200
Colour in Hazen Units (H.U.) 15
Detergents (mg/L) Nil
Total Mercury (mg/L) 0.005
Trichloroethylene (mg/L) 0.3
Zinc (mg/L) 0.5
Whole effluent toxicity
Total Phosphorus (mg/L) 2 Guideline value
Total Nitrogen 2 Guideline value
Remarks
Standard values are daily/monthly average discharge values. Not detectable (nd) means that the
pollution status is below the detectable level by the measurement methods established by the
Authority.

-- 158 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
159 [Issue 1]
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Rule 12]
MONITORING GUIDE FOR DISCHARGE INTO THE ENVIRONMENT
DISCHARGING FACILITY
	Gas and Oil
	Dairy Products
	Grain Mills
	Canned Fruits & Vegetables
	Canned & Preserved Sea Foods
	Sugar Processing
	Textiles
	Cement
	Feedlots
	Electroplating
	Organic Chemicals
	Inorganic Chemicals
	Plastics & Synthetics
	Soap & Detergents
	Fertiliser Manufacturing
	Petroleum Refining
	Iron & Steel Manufacturing
	Non-ferrous
	Phosphate Manufacturing
	Steam Electric Power Generating
Water quality
parameters
Biochemical
Oxygen
Demand,
BOD x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Total
Suspended
Solids x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
pH x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Faecal
Coliforms x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Oil & Grease x x x x x x x x x x
Temperature x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Chemical
Oxygen
Demand,
COD x x x x x x x x
Colour/Dye/
Pigment x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Elemental
Phosphorus x
Total
Phosphorus x x x x x
Ammonia
(as N) x x x x x
Organic
Nitrogen as N x x
Nitrate x x x
Flow x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Phenols x x x x x

-- 159 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 160
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
DISCHARGING FACILITY
	Gas and Oil
	Dairy Products
	Grain Mills
	Canned Fruits & Vegetables
	Canned & Preserved Sea Foods
	Sugar Processing
	Textiles
	Cement
	Feedlots
	Electroplating
	Organic Chemicals
	Inorganic Chemicals
	Plastics & Synthetics
	Soap & Detergents
	Fertiliser Manufacturing
	Petroleum Refining
	Iron & Steel Manufacturing
	Non-ferrous
	Phosphate Manufacturing
	Steam Electric Power Generating
Sulphide x x x
Total
Chromium x x x x
Chromium VI x x x x
Chrome
Copper x x x x
Nickel x x
Zinc x x x x
Zinc x
Cn total x x
Cyanide A x x
Fluorine x x x x x
Free
Available
Chlorine
Residual
Chlorine x x
Cadmium x x x
Lead x x x x
Iron x
Tin x x x
Silver x
Gold x
Iridium x
Palladium x
Rhodium x
Ruthenium x
Mercury
(total) x

-- 160 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
161 [Issue 1]
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
DISCHARGING FACILITY
	Gas and Oil
	Dairy Products
	Grain Mills
	Canned Fruits & Vegetables
	Canned & Preserved Sea Foods
	Sugar Processing
	Textiles
	Cement
	Feedlots
	Electroplating
	Organic Chemicals
	Inorganic Chemicals
	Plastics & Synthetics
	Soap & Detergents
	Fertiliser Manufacturing
	Petroleum Refining
	Iron & Steel Manufacturing
	Non-ferrous
	Phosphate Manufacturing
	Steam Electric Power Generating
Total Organic
Carbon x x
Aluminium x x
Arsenic x x x
Selenium x
Barium
Manganese x
Tannin
Oil
Settleable
Solids
Surfactants
X-means parameters to be monitored
DISCHARGUNG
	FACILITY
Fero Alloy
	manufacturing
	Leather tanning and
	finishing
	Glass
Asbestos
	manufacturing
	Rubber processing
	Timber products
	Pulp, Paper and
	paperboard
	Builders paper and
	paperboard mills
	Meat products
	Paving and roofing
	materials
	Intensive chemical
	agriculture farm
	Edible vegetable oils
	and fats
	Hotels, Restaurants
	and Game Lodges
Water quality
parameters
BOD x x x x x x x x x x
TSS x x x x x x x x x x x
pH x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Faecal
Coliforms x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Oil & Grease x x x x x x x x x
Temperature x x x x x x x x x x x x

-- 161 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 162
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
DISCHARGUNG
	FACILITY
Fero Alloy
	manufacturing
	Leather tanning and
	finishing
	Glass
Asbestos
	manufacturing
	Rubber processing
	Timber products
	Pulp, Paper and
	paperboard
	Builders paper and
	paperboard mills
	Meat products
	Paving and roofing
	materials
	Intensive chemical
	agriculture farm
	Edible vegetable oils
	and fats
	Hotels, Restaurants
	and Game Lodges
COD x x x x
Colour/Dye/
Pigment x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Elemental
Phosphorus x x
Total
Phosphorus x x x
Ammonia (as
N) x x x x x
Organic
Nitrogen as N x x
Nitrate
Flow x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Phenols x x x
Sulphide
Total
Chromium x x x
Chromium VI x
Chrome x
Copper
Nickel
Zinc x
Zinc
Cyanide total x
Cn
Fluorine x x
Free available
Chlorine x x
Residual
Chlorine
Cadmium
Lead
Iron x

-- 162 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
163 [Issue 1]
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
DISCHARGUNG
	FACILITY
Fero Alloy
	manufacturing
	Leather tanning and
	finishing
	Glass
Asbestos
	manufacturing
	Rubber processing
	Timber products
	Pulp, Paper and
	paperboard
	Builders paper and
	paperboard mills
	Meat products
	Paving and roofing
	materials
	Intensive chemical
	agriculture farm
	Edible vegetable oils
	and fats
	Hotels, Restaurants
	and Game Lodges
Tin
Silver
Gold
Iridium
Palladium
Rhodium
Ruthenium
Mercury
(total)
Total organic
Carbon
Aluminium
Arsenic
Selenium
Barium
Manganese x
Tannin x
Oil x
Settleable
Solids x
Surfactants x x
X-means parameters to be monitored
DISCHARGING
	FACILITY
	Bakeries and wheat
	confectioneries
	Breweries (malt)
	Soft drinks and
	carbonated waters
	Sugar confectionery
	Tobacco processing
	Distilling and blending
	of spirits
	Motor vehicle
	assembly
	Paints, varnishes and
	laquers
	Batteries manufacture
	Cosmetics
	Printing, publishing
	and allied industry
	Domestic sewage
	system
	Pharmaceutical
	industries
	Tea/Coffe Industries
	Slaughter Houses
	Combined sewage
	(Domestic+ and
	Industrial effluent
)
Water
quality
BOD x x x x x x x x x x x x x x

-- 163 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 164
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
DISCHARGING
	FACILITY
	Bakeries and wheat
	confectioneries
	Breweries (malt)
	Soft drinks and
	carbonated waters
	Sugar confectionery
	Tobacco processing
	Distilling and blending of
	spirits
Motor vehicle assembly
	Paints, varnishes and
	laquers
	Batteries manufacture
	Cosmetics
	Printing, publishing and
	allied industry
	Domestic sewage system
	Pharmaceutical industries
	Tea/Coffee Industries
	Slaughter Houses
	Combined sewage
	(Domestic+ and Industrial
	effluent
TSS x x x x x x x x x x x
pH x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Faecal
Coliforms/
Ecoli. x x x x x x x x x x x x
Oil &
Grease x x x x x x x
Tempera
ture x x x x x x x x x x x x
COD x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Colour/
Dye/
Pigment x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Elemental
Phos
phorus
Total
Phos
phorus x x x x
Ammonia
(as N) x x x x
Organic
Nitrogen
as N x x x x
Nitrate x
Flow x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Phenols x
Sulphide/
Sulphur x x x
Total
Chromiu
m x x
Chromium
VI x
Chrome x

-- 164 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
165 [Issue 1]
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
DISCHARGING
	FACILITY
	Bakeries and wheat
	confectioneries
	Breweries (malt)
	Soft drinks and
	carbonated waters
	Sugar confectionery
	Tobacco processing
	Distilling and blending
	of spirits
	Motor vehicle assembly
	Paints, varnishes and
	laquers
	Batteries manufacture
	Cosmetics
	Printing, publishing and
	allied industry
	Domestic sewage
	system
	Pharmaceutical
	industries
	Tea/Coffee Industries
	Slaughter Houses
	Combined sewage
	(Domestic+ and
	Industrial effluent
)
Copper x x x
Nickel x x
Zinc x x x x x
Zinc A
Cn total x
Cn A
Fluorine x
Free
available
Chlorine x x x x
Cadmium x x
Lead x x x x x x
Iron x x x x x
Tin x
Silver x
Gold x x x
Iridium x
Palladium x
Rhodium x
Ruthe
nium x
Mercury x x x x
Total
organic
Carbon,
TOC
Aluminium x
Arsenic x
Selenium x
Barium x
Manga
nese x
Tannin x

-- 165 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 166
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
DISCHARGING
	FACILITY
	Bakeries and wheat
	confectioneries
	Breweries (malt)
	Soft drinks and
	carbonated waters
	Sugar
	confectionery
	Tobacco
	processing
	Distilling and
	blending of spirits
	Motor vehicle
	assembly
	Paints, varnishes
	and laquers
	Batteries
	manufacture
	Cosmetics
	Printing, publishing
	and allied industry
	Domestic sewage
	system
	Pharmaceutical
	industries
	Tea/Coffee
	Industries
	Slaughter Houses
	Combined sewage
	(Domestic+ and
	Industrial effluent
)
Oil x x
Settleable
Solids x x
Surfac
tants x x x
X-Means parameters to be monitored
FIFTH SCHEDULE
[Rule 13.]
STANDARDS FOR EFFLUENT DISCHARGE INTO PUBLIC SEWERS
Parameter Maximum levels
permissible
Suspended solids (mg/L) 250
Total dissolved solids (mg/L) 2000
Temperature ºC 20–35
pH 6–9
Oil and Grease (mg/L)–where conventional treatment shall be used 10
Oil and Grease (mg/L)–where ponds is a final treatment method 5
Ammonia Nitrogen (mg/L) 20
Substances with an obnoxious smell Shall not be discharged
into the sewers
Biological Oxygen Demand BOD 5 days at 20 ºC (mg/L) 500
Chemical Oxygen Demand COD (mg/L) 1000
Arsenic (mg/L) 0.02
Mercury (mg/L) 0.05
Lead (mg/L) 1.0
Cadmium (mg/L) 0.5
Chromium VI (mg/L) 0.05
Chromium (Total) (mg/L) 2.0
Copper (mg/L) 1.0
Zinc (mg/L) 5.0
Selenium (mg/L) 0.2

-- 166 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
167 [Issue 1]
FIFTH SCHEDULE—continued
Parameter Maximum levels
permissible
Nickel (mg/L) 3.0
Nitrates (mg/L) 20
Phosphates (mg/L) 30
Cyanide Total (mg/L) 2
Sulphide (mg/L) 2
Phenols (mg/L) 10
Detergents (mg/L) 15
Colour Less than 40 Hazen
units
Alkyl Mercury Not detectable (nd)
Free and saline Ammonia as N (mg/L) 4.0
Parameter Maximum levels
permissible
Calcium Carbide Nil
Chloroform Nil
Inflammable solvents Nil
Radioactive residues Nil
Degreasing solvents of mono-di-trichloroethylene type Nil
and any other parameter as the Authority and the sewerage service provider may prescribe.
Prescribed Form
SIXTH SCHEDULE
[Rule 14.]
MONITORING FOR DISCHARGE OF TREATED EFFLUENT INTO THE ENVIRONMENT
Lead Agency: ........................................................................................................................................
Name of organisation: ..........................................................................................................................
Nature of work: .....................................................................................................................................
Sample number: ...................................................................................................................................
Description of sample: ..........................................................................................................................
Date and time sample received in laboratory: ......................................................................................
Date and time sample was examined: ..................................................................................................
Average Daily Flow Rate (m 3 /day)
Parameter RESULTS
Sample
upstream
Sample at
discharge
point
Sample
downstream
Guide value Remark
pH 6.5–8.5

-- 167 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 168
SIXTH SCHEDULE—continued
Parameter RESULTS
Sample
upstream
Sample at
discharge
point
Sample
downstream
Guide value Remark
Biological Oxygen
Demand (5 days
at 20 ºC)
30 (mg/L) max
Chemical Oxygen
Demand
50 (mg/L) max
Suspended solids 30 (mg/L) max
Ammonia – NH 4 +
Nitrate–NO 3 +
Nitrite –NO 2
100 (mg/L)
max
Total Dissolved
Solids
1200 (mg/L)
max
E.Coli Nil/100 ml
Total Coliform 1000/100 ml
Others
1. ........................................................................................................................................................
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
4. ........................................................................................................................................................
As guided by the Fourth Schedule or as may be directed by the Authority.
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
FORMS
Form A (r. 16)
APPLICATION FOR EFFLUENT DISCHARGE INTO AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT
PART A – DETAILS OF APPLICANT
A1. Name of applicant: .....................................................................................................................
A2. Personal Identification Number: .................................................................................................
A3. Address: .....................................................................................................................................
A4. Name of contact person: ............................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
A5. Telephone No.: ...........................................................................................................................
A6. Fax No.: ......................................................................................................................................
A7. E-mail: ........................................................................................................................................
A8. Previous Licence Number: .........................................................................................................
PART B – DETAILS OF DISCHARGING FACILITY
B1. Location of discharging facility:
....................................................................................................................................................
B2. Activity of discharging facility (e.g. coffee factory, sewage plant, tea factory):
....................................................................................................................................................

-- 168 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
169 [Issue 1]
SEVENTH SCHEDULE—continued
B3. Nature and composition of effluent:
....................................................................................................................................................
B4. Does the facility have effluent treatment plant? (Yes or No)
....................................................................................................................................................
B5. Maximum quantity of effluent which is proposed to discharge on any one day (in m 3 /day)
....................................................................................................................................................
B6. The highest rate at which it proposes to discharge the effluent (in m 3 /hr.)
....................................................................................................................................................
B7. Source of processing water to the facility:
....................................................................................................................................................
B8. Does the facility have access to a laboratory for monitoring the quality of discharged effluent?
(Yes or No) .................................................................................................................................
B9. Description of the activities of the facility:
....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
B10. Point of discharge:
....................................................................................................................................................
PART C – DECLARATION BY APPLICANT
I hereby certify that the information given above is correct and true to the best of my knowledge:
.............................................................................
Signature of Applicant
...............................................................................................................................................................
Full names in Block letters
...............................................................................................................................................................
Position
On behalf of: .......................................................
(Firm name and seal)
Date: ...................................................................
PART D – FOR OFFICIAL USE
Approved/Not Approved .......................................................................................................................
COMMENTS .........................................................................................................................................
Official Signature ................................................
Date ....................................................................
Important Notes:
Please submit the following:
(a) Application form in duplicate; and
(b) Prescribed fee to:
Director General
The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA)
Kapiti Road, South C,
P. O. Box 67839-00200, Nairobi, Kenya
Tel.: 254-02-605522/6/7, or 601945
Fax: 254-02-608997
E-mail: dgnema@swiftkenya.com

-- 169 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 170
SEVENTH SCHEDULE—continued
Form B (r. 17)
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
EFFLUENT DISCHARGE LICENCE
Application Reference No. ..................................
Licence No. .........................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE
This is to certify that the application for discharge to aquatic environment received from ...................
....................................... (name of applicant) of .................................................................. (address)
to the National Environment Management Authority in accordance with the Environmental
Management and Co-ordination (Water Quality) Regulations, 2005 for ...............................................
................................ (facility) located at .............................................................. (locality and district)
to discharge effluent to ......................................................................................... has been evaluated
and a permit is hereby issued for discharge, subject to the attached conditions.
Dated this ........................................................... day of ................................................... 20 .............
Signature: ...........................................................
(Official Stamp)
.............................................................................
Director General
National Environment Management Authority
CONDITIONS OF LICENCE
1. This Licence is valid for a period of .............................................................. from the date hereof.
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
4. ........................................................................................................................................................
5. ........................................................................................................................................................
Form C
REGISTER FOR EFFLUENT DISCHARGE LICENCE INTO THE ENVIRONMENT
Name of
discharging
facility
Location
of facility
Licence
No.
Date
of
issue
Expiry
date
Conditions
of Licence
Discharging
into
Date
and
name of
filing
officer
Date Remarks/
Status

-- 170 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
171 [Issue 1]
SEVENTH SCHEDULE—continued
Name of
discharging
facility
Location
of facility
Licence
No.
Date
of
issue
Expiry
date
Conditions
of Licence
Discharging
into
Date
and
name of
filing
officer
Date Remarks/
Status
Status of Licence
1. New
2. Cancelled
3. Variation
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Rule 19]
MICROBIOLOGICAL QUALITY GUIDELINES FOR USE OF WASTEWATER FOR
IRRIGATION
Reuse conditions Exposed group Intestinal nematodes
(MPN/L)*
Coliforms
(MPN/100 ml)
Unrestricted irrigation
(crops likely to be
eaten uncooked, sports
fields, public parks)
Workers, consumers,
public <1 <1000**
Restricted irrigation
(cereal crops, industrial
crops, fodder crops,
pasture and trees***)
Workers <1 No standard
recommended
* Ascaris lumbricoides, Trichuris trichiura and human hookworms.
** A more stringent guideline (<200 coliform group of bacteria per 100 ml) is appropriate for public
lawns, such as hotel lawns, with which the public may come into direct contact.
*** In the case of fruit trees, irrigation should cease two weeks before fruit is picked and fruit
should be picked off the ground, overhead irrigation should not be used.
NINTH SCHEDULE
[Rule 20.]
STANDARDS FOR IRRIGATION WATER
Parameter Permissible Level
pH 6.5–8.5
Aluminium 5 (mg/L)
Arsenic 0.1 (mg/L)
Boron 0.1 (mg/L)

-- 171 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 172
NINTH SCHEDULE—continued
Parameter Permissible Level
Cadmium 0.5 (mg/L)
Chloride 0.01 (mg/L)
Chromium 1.5 (mg/L)
Cobalt 0.1 (mg/L)
Parameter Permissible Level
Copper 0.05 (mg/L)
E.coli Nil/100 ml
Fluoride 1.0 (mg/L)
Iron 1 (mg/L)
Lead 5 (mg/L)
Selenium 0.19 (mg/L)
Sodium Absorption Ratio (SAR) 6 (mg/L)
Total dissolved solids 1200 (mg/L)
Zinc 2 (mg/L)
TENTH SCHEDULE
[Rule 25.]
QUALITY STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL WATERS
Parameter Maximum Permissible Level
Arsenic (mg/L) 0.05
Fecal Coliform (counts/100 ml) Nil
Total Coliform (counts/100 ml) 500
Cadmium 0.01
Chromium 0.1
Colour (True Colour Units) 100
Light Penetration (meters) 1.2
Mercury (mg/L) 0.001
Odour (Threshold Odour Number, TON) 16
Oil and Grease (mg/L) 5
pH 6–9
Radiation, Total (Bq/L) 0.37
Surfactant, MBAs (mg/L) 2
Temperature (°C) 30
Turbidity (NTU) 50

-- 172 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
173 [Issue 1]
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
[Rule 28.]
FEES
The fees chargeable under these Regulations shall be as specified hereafter—
(a) Application for discharge of effluent into the environment—
(i) Sewerage service providers – Sh. 5,000.00;
(ii) Discharging facility in Schedule 4 other than (i) above – Sh. 5,000.00;
(iii) Any other Institution – Sh. 5,000.00
(b) Annual licence fee for discharge of effluent into the environment—
(i) Sewerage service providers – Sh. 500,000.00;
(ii) Discharging facility in Schedule 6 other than (i) above – Sh. 100,000.00;
(iii) Any other Institutions – Sh. 20,000.00;
(iv) Others – Sh. 10,000.00
(c) Inspection of records/effluent register – Sh. 200.00
(d) Variation of effluent discharge licence – 10% of the annual licence fee.

-- 173 of 302 --

-- 174 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
175 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION
(WASTE MANAGEMENT) REGULATIONS, 2006
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Application.
PART II – GENERAL PROVISIONS
4. Responsibility of waste generator.
5. Cleaner production methods.
6. Segregation of waste by generator.
7. Waste transportation licence.
8. Responsibility of a waste transporter.
9. Transportation of waste by licensed transporter.
10. License for disposal facility.
11. Waste treatment by operators of disposal sites.
12. Requirement of Environmental Audit.
13. Re-use and recycling plants.
PART III – INDUSTRIAL WASTES
14. General obligation to mitigate pollution.
15. Treatment of industrial waste.
PART IV – HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC WASTES
16. Hazardous waste specifications.
17. Requirement for Environmental Impact Assessment.
18. Handling, storing and transporting of hazardous waste.
19. Treatment of hazardous waste.
20. Export permit.
21. Transit of hazardous waste.
22. Insurance.
23. Register of permits.
PART V – PESTICIDES AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES
24. Application of Cap. 346.
25. Disposal of pesticides.
PART VI – BIOMEDICAL WASTES
26. Requirement for EIA from biomedical waste generator.
27. Approval of biomedical waste generating facility.
28. Segregation of biomedical waste.
29. Securing and packaging of biomedical waste.
30. Treatment of biomedical waste.

-- 175 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 176
Regulation
31. Monitoring by lead agency.
32. Storage of biomedical waste.
33. Transportation of biomedical waste.
34. Transfer stations.
35. Standards for biomedical waste disposal sites and plants.
36. Requirement of EIA for biomedical waste disposal sites or plants and licence to
operate.
37. Requirement for Environmental Audits.
PART VII – RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
38. Application of Radiation Protection Act.
39. Disposal of radioactive substance.
PART VIII – MISCELLANEOUS
40. Transitional provision for transporting waste.
41. Transitional provision for disposal facilities.
42. Offences and penalties.
43. Operation of Regulations.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE – FORMS
SECOND SCHEDULE – FEES
THIRD SCHEDULE – STANDARD FOR TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF
WASTES
FOURTH SCHEDULE – WASTES CONSIDERED HAZARDOUS
FIFTH SCHEDULE – LIST OF HAZARDOUS CHARACTERISTICS
SIXTH SCHEDULE APPLICATION FOR TRANSBOUNDARY MOVEMENT
OF WASTE
SEVENTH SCHEDULE – CATEGORIES OF BIOMEDICAL WASTE
EIGHTH SCHEDULE COLOR CODE FOR BIOMEDICAL
WASTE/SYMBOLS
NINTH SCHEDULE – TREATMENT METHODS OF BIOMEDICAL WASTES
TENTH SCHEDULE – STANDARDS FOR WASTE AUTOCLAVING

-- 176 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
177 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION (WASTE
MANAGEMENT) REGULATIONS, 2006
[L.N. 121/2006.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental Management and Co-ordination
(Waste Management Regulations), 2006.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations unless the context otherwise requires—
“applicant” means any person who applied to the Authority or lead agency for
authorization to perform specific activities connected with chemicals, pesticides,
radioactive substances and waste management;
“biodegradable substance” means a substance that can be degraded by micro-
organisms;
“biomedical waste” means any waste which is generated during the diagnosis,
treatment or immunization of human beings or animals or in research activities
pertaining thereto or in the production or testing of biologicals and includes the
category of waste specified in the Ninth Schedule to these Regulations;
“Board” means the Radiation Protection Board established under the Radiation
Protection Act (Cap. 243);
“disposal site” means any area of land on which waste disposal facilities are
physically located and includes a final waste discharge point without the intention of
retrieval but does not mean a re-use or re-cycling plant or site;
“domestic waste” means waste generated from residences;
“environmentally sound management of waste” means taking all practical steps
to ensure that waste is managed in a manner which protects human health and the
environment against the adverse effects which may result from the waste;
“incineration” means the controlled burning of solids, liquids, gaseous
combustible waste to produce gases and residues containing little or no combustible
materials;
“industrial waste” means waste arising from processing and manufacturing
industries or trade undertakings and can take the form of liquid, non-liquid, solid and
gaseous substances;
“pesticide” has the meaning assigned to it under the Pesticide Control Act (Cap. 346);
“Prior Informed Consent” means the international operation procedure for
exchanging, receiving and handling notification information by the competent authority
on waste;
“radioactive waste” means any radioactive material that has been, or will be,
discarded as of being of no further use;
“recycling of waste” means the processing of waste material into a new product
of similar chemical composition;

-- 177 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 178
“reprocessing” means the processing of waste into a new product of different
chemical composition;
“re-use” means waste re-used with or without cleaning and/or repairing;
“segregation” means any activity that separates waste materials for processing;
“sludge” means a non-flowing mixture of solids and liquids;
“storage” means placement of waste in a suitable location or facility where
isolation, environmental, health protection and human control are provided in order to
ensure waste is subsequently retrieved for treatment and conditioning and/or disposal;
“toxic chemical” means any substance which on entry to or into an organism
through ingestion, inhalation and dermal contact is injurious, causes physiological or
biochemical disturbances or otherwise causes deterioration of the functions of the
organism in any way;
“treatment” means any method and technique or process for altering the
biological, chemical or physical characteristics of wastes to reduce the hazards it
presents and includes facilities intended to reduce the cost of disposal of such waste
and whose treatment objectives include volume reduction, disinfection, neutralization
or other change of composition to reduce hazards;
“waste generator” means any person whose activities or activities under his or
her direction produces waste or if that person is not known, the person who is in
possession or control of that waste; and
“waste management” means the activities either administrative or operational
that are used in handling, packaging, treatment, condition, storage and disposal of
waste.
3. Application
These Regulations shall apply to all categories of waste as is provided for herein.
PART II – GENERAL PROVISIONS
4. Responsibility of waste generator
(1) No person shall dispose of any waste on a public highway, street, road,
recreational area or in any public place except in a designated waste receptacle.
(2) A waste generator shall collect, segregate and dispose such waste in the manner
provided for under these Regulations.
5. Cleaner production methods
A waste generator shall minimize the waste generated by adopting the following
cleaner production methods—
(a) improvement of production process through—
(i) conserving raw materials and energy;
(ii) eliminating the use of toxic raw materials; and
(iii) reducing toxic emissions and wastes;
(b) monitoring the product cycle from beginning to end by—
(i) identifying and eliminating potential negative impacts of the product;
(ii) enabling the recovery and re-use of the product where possible; and
(iii) reclamation and recycling; and

-- 178 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
179 [Issue 1]
(c) incorporating environmental concerns in the design and disposal of a
product.
6. Segregation of waste by generator
A waste generator shall segregate waste by separating hazardous waste from non-
hazardous waste and shall dispose of such wastes in such facility as shall be provided by
the relevant local authority.
7. Waste transportation licence
(1) No person shall be granted a licence under the Act to transport waste unless such
person operates a transportation vehicle approved by the Authority upon the
recommendation of the relevant lead agency.
(2) Any vehicle used for transportation of waste or any other means of conveyance
shall be labelled in such a manner as may be directed by the Authority.
(3) The Authority in consultation with the relevant lead agency may designate
particular geographical areas to be the areas for operation for licensed waste transporters.
(4) An application for a licence to transport waste shall be submitted in Form I set out
in the First Schedule to these Regulations and shall be accompanied by the prescribed
fees set out in the Second Schedule.
(5) A licence issued under the Act for the transportation of waste shall be in Form II
set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations and shall be valid for one year from the
date of issue.
8. Responsibility of a waste transporter
Any person granted a license to transport waste shall ensure that—
(1) the collection and transportation of such waste is conducted in such a
manner that will not cause scattering of the waste;
(2) the vehicles and equipment for the transportation of waste are in such a
state that shall not cause scattering of, or flowing out of waste or emission
of noxious smells from such waste;
(3) the vehicles for transportation and other means of conveyance of waste
follow the scheduled routes approved by the Authority from the point of
collection to the disposal site or plant; and
(4) he or his agent(s) possess at all times during transportation of the waste, a
duly filled tracking document as set out in Form III in the First Schedule to
these Regulations and shall produce the same such tracking document on
demand to any law enforcement officer.
9. Transportation of waste by licensed transporter
Any person licensed to transport waste shall collect waste from the designated area of
operation and shall deliver such waste to the designated disposal site or plant.
10. Licence for disposal facility
(1) Any person granted a licence under the Act and any other licence that may be
required by the relevant Local Authority to operate a waste disposal site or plant, shall
comply with all conditions imposed by the Authority to ensure that such waste disposal
site or plant operates in an environmentally sound manner.
(2) An application for a licence to operate a waste disposal site or plant shall be
submitted in Form IV set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations and shall be
accompanied by the prescribed fees set out in the Second Schedule.

-- 179 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 180
(3) A licence issued under the Act for the operation of a waste disposal site or plant
shall be in Form V as set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(4) A licence to operate a waste disposal site or plant shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date of issue and may be renewed for a further period of one year on such
terms and conditions as the Authority may deem necessary or impose for purposes of
ensuring public health and sound environmental management.
(5) In issuing a waste disposal licence, the Authority shall clearly indicate the disposal
operation permitted and identified for the particular waste.
11. Waste treatment by operators of disposal sites
Any operator of a disposal site or plant shall apply the relevant provisions on waste
treatment under the Local Government Act (Cap. 265) and Regulations to ensure that
such waste does not present any imminent and substantial danger to the public health, the
environment and natural resources.
12. Requirement for Environmental Audit
Every licensed owner or operator of a waste disposal site or plant shall carry out an
annual environmental audit pursuant to the provisions of the Act.
13. Re-use and recycling plants
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in these Regulations, these Regulations
shall also apply to plants and sites established for re-use or re-cycling of wastes.
PART III – INDUSTRIAL WASTES
14. General obligation to mitigate pollution
(1) Every trade or industrial undertaking shall install at its premises anti-pollution
equipment for the treatment of waste emanating from such trade or industrial undertaking.
(2) An anti-pollution equipment installed pursuant to paragraph (1), shall be
determined by the best practicable means, environmentally sound practice or other
guidelines as the Authority may determine.
15. Treatment of industrial waste
No industry shall discharge or dispose of any waste in any state into the environment,
unless the waste has been treated in a treatment facility in a manner prescribed by the
Authority in consultation with the relevant lead agency.
PART IV – HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC WASTES
16. Hazardous waste specifications
For the purposes of this Part, hazardous waste means be any waste specified in the
Fourth Schedule or any waste having the characteristics specified in the Fifth Schedule.
17. Requirement for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
(1) No person shall engage in any activity likely to generate any hazardous waste
without a valid Environmental Impact Assessment licence issued by Authority under the
provisions of the Act.

-- 180 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
181 [Issue 1]
18. Handling, storing and transporting of hazardous waste
(1) Every generator of hazardous waste shall ensure that every container or package
for storing such waste is labelled in easily legible characters, written in both English and
Kiswahili.
(2) The label shall contain the following information—
(a) the identity of the hazardous waste;
(b) the name and address of the generator of waste;
(c) the net contents;
(d) the normal storage stability and methods of storage;
(e) the name and percentage of weight of active ingredients and names and
percentages of weights of other ingredients or half-life of radioactive
material;
(f) warning or caution statements which may include any of the following as
appropriate—
(i) the words “WARNING” or “CAUTION”;
(ii) the word “POISON” (marked indelibly in red on a contrasting
background); and
(iii) the words “DANGER! KEEP AWAY FROM UNAUTHORISED
PERSONS”; and
(iv) a pictogram of a skull and crossbones;
(g) a statement of first aid measures, including the antidote when waste is
inhaled, ingested or dermal contact and a direction that a physician must be
contacted immediately.
19. Treatment of hazardous waste
(1) Every person who generates toxic or hazardous waste shall treat or cause to be
treated such hazardous waste using the classes of incinerators prescribed in the Third
Schedule to these Regulations or any other appropriate technology approved by the
Authority.
(2) Any leachate or other by-products of such treated waste shall be disposed of or
treated in accordance with the conditions set out in the license or in accordance with
guidelines issued by the Authority in consultation with the relevant lead agency.
20. Export permit
(1) No person shall export hazardous wastes without a valid permit issued by the
Authority and a valid Prior Informed Consent document issued by the designated national
authority of the receiving country.
(2) An application for exportation of toxic or hazardous waste shall be submitted to the
Authority in Form I set out in the Sixth Schedule accompanied by the prescribed fee and a
copy of the Prior Informed Consent document from the receiving country.
(3) Where the Authority is satisfied that all the requirements have been complied with,
it shall issue an export permit as set out in Form II in the Sixth Schedule.
(4) Where a permit is issued under these Regulations, the permit holder shall send a
copy of the permit to the Kenya Revenue Authority for the necessary customs verification
and control.
(5) An export permit issued under these Regulations shall relate to the specific export
transaction but shall not be valid for any subsequent export transactions or transferable.

-- 181 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 182
21. Transit of hazardous waste
No person shall transit toxic or hazardous waste destined for another country through
the territory of Kenya without a valid Prior Informed Consent for such movement issued by
the Authority including the prescribed document for transboundary movement of waste set
out in Form I in the Sixth Schedule, the transit permit set out in Form II in the Sixth
Schedule and any other documents prescribed by the competent customs authority.
22. Insurance
(1) An application for an export permit issued under the Act and these Regulations
shall satisfy the Authority that the hazardous waste transporter has subscribed to an
insurance policy covering the risks likely to arise out of the activity for which the licence is
required.
(2) A generator of waste which has been characterised as toxic or hazardous under
these Regulations, shall upon written instructions from the Authority, subscribe to an
insurance policy to cover the risks caused by the waste.
23. Register of permits
The Authority shall maintain a register of all permits issued under these Regulations.
PART V – PESTICIDES AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES
24. Application of Cap. 346
The Regulations made under the Pests Control Products Act relating to the
classification, registration, labelling, packaging, advertising, import, export, distribution,
storage, transportation, handling and disposal of pesticides shall apply to this Part.
25. Disposal of pesticides
No person shall dispose of any pesticide or toxic substance other than at a designated
site or plant approved by the Authority.
PART VI – BIOMEDICAL WASTES
26. Requirement for EIA from biomedical waste generator
No person shall own or operate any institution that generates bio-medical waste
without a valid Environmental Impact Assessment licence issued by the Authority under
the provisions of the Act.
27. Approval of biomedical waste generating facility
Every waste generator of biomedical waste shall ensure that the generating facility has
been approved by the appropriate lead agency and the relevant Local Authority.
28. Segregation of biomedical waste
Every waste generator of biomedical waste shall at the point of generation and at all
stages thereafter segregate the waste in accordance with the categories specified in the
Seventh Schedule to these Regulations.
29. Securing and packaging of bio-medical waste
All biomedical waste shall be securely packaged in biohazard containers which shall
be labelled with the symbols set out in Part I and Part II in the Eighth Schedule to these
Regulations.

-- 182 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
183 [Issue 1]
30. Treatment of biomedical waste
Every waste generator shall treat or cause to be treated all biomedical waste in the
manner set out in the Ninth Schedule to these Regulations, before such biomedical waste
is stored or disposed of.
31. Monitoring by lead agency
The relevant lead agency shall monitor the treatment of all biomedical waste to ensure
that such waste are treated in a manner that will not adversely affect public health and the
environment.
32. Storage of biomedical waste
No person shall store biomedical waste at a temperature above 0°C for more than
seven days without the written approval of the relevant lead agency, provided that
untreated pathological waste shall be disposed of within 48 hours.
33. Transportation of biomedical waste
(1) No person shall transport biomedical waste without a valid permit issued by the
relevant lead agency in consultation with the relevant Local Authority.
(2) No person shall transport or allow to be transported biomedical waste save in a
specially designed vehicle or other means of conveyance so as to prevent spillage,
leakage or scattering of such waste.
34. Transfer stations
The provisions of these Regulations relating to storage and transportation of bio-
medical waste shall apply to operators of transfer stations.
35. Standards for biomedical waste disposal sites or plants
No person shall be issued with a licence to operate a biomedical waste disposal site or
plant unless such site or plant complies with the requirements set out in the Third and
Tenth Schedule to these Regulations.
36. Requirement for EIA for biomedical waste disposal site or plant and licence to
operate
No person shall own or operate a biomedical waste disposal site or plant without a
valid Environmental Impact Assessment licence issued by the Authority under the
provisions of the Act and a licence to operate such plant issued by the relevant lead
agency and the relevant Local Authority.
37. Requirement of Environmental Audits
Within six months after the commencement of these Regulations, operators of
biomedical waste disposal sites or plants shall submit Environmental Audit reports and
thereafter annual Audit Reports to the Authority.
PART VII – RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
38. Application of Cap 243
The provisions of the regulations made under the Radiation Protection Act (Cap. 243)
in relation to the classification, registrations, labelling, packaging, transportation,
importation, exportations, waste disposal, health and safety requirements with regard to
radioactive substances shall apply to this Part.

-- 183 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 184
39. Disposal of radioactive substance
No person shall dispose of any radioactive substance or waste other than at a
designated site or plant approved by the Authority.
PART VIII – MISCELLANEOUS
40. Transitional provision for transporting waste
Any person, who before the commencement of these Regulations was carrying out the
business of transporting waste, shall apply to the Authority for a licence for the
transportation of waste in the prescribed Form I set out in the First Schedule within six
months after the commencement of these Regulations.
41. Transitional provision for disposal facilities
Any person who before the commencement of these Regulations was carrying out the
business of operating a waste disposal site or plant shall apply to the Authority for a
licence in the prescribed Form IV set out in the First Schedule within six months after the
commencement of these Regulations.
42. Offences and penalties
Any person who violates the provisions of these Regulations commits an offence and
is liable on conviction to imprisonment for such a term and such fine as provided for in the
Act.
43. Operation of Regulations
These Regulations shall operate in addition to any other regulations and standards
made under any other law.
FIRST SCHEDULE
(To be completed in Triplicate)
Form I (Regulation 7)
[FORM NEMA/WM/1]
APPLICATION/RENEWAL FOR A LICENCE FOR TRANSPORTATION OF WASTE
I hereby apply for a license to transport waste, of which particulars are given below:
Name and address of applicant ............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
PIN Number ..........................................................................................................................................
Registration number and type of vehicles to transport waste ...............................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Quantity of waste per vehicle to be transported ...................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Licensed sites/plant to which waste is to be transported ......................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Collection schedule ..............................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................

-- 184 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
185 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM I—continued
Any other information ...........................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Attach recommendation document(s) from the relevant lead agency.
Is application for: Initial licence Renewal
Previous Licence Number ....................................................................................................................
Date .................................................................... Signature ............................................................
Designation/Title: ..................................................................................................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Application received by ............................................ on .................................................. , 20 ............
Fee paid KShs. ............................................. (in words) ......................................................................
.................................................................................................................
Director-General
National Environmental Management Authority
Form II (Regulation 7)
[FORM NEMA/WM/2]
LICENCE TO TRANSPORT WASTE
License No. TR/HW ..............................................................................................................................
Name ....................................................................................................................................................
Address ................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby licensed to transport waste to: ....................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
(location/district)
from ......................................................................................................................................................
(location/district)
Type and registration number of vehicles licensed ..............................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
This licence is valid from .................................................................................................. , 20 .............
to ....................................................................................................................................... , 20 .............
This licence is granted subject to the following conditions: ..................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Date .................................................................... Signature ............................................................
.................................................................................................................
Director-General
National Environmental Management Authority

-- 185 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 186
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
Form III (Regulation 8)
[FORM NEMA/WM/3]
(To be completed in triplicate)
TRACKING DOCUMENT
A Serial No. ..............................................................................................................
Registered Name of Transporter ..........................................................................
Transporter Usual Municipality/District of operation ................................................................
Licence number ....................................................................................................
Issuing Authority ...................................................................................................
CONSIGNMENT NOTE FOR THE CARRIAGE AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
(1) Area collected ................................................................................................
B (2) Type of waste .................................................................................................
(3) Description and physical nature of waste ......................................................
Description of the (4) Quantity/size of waste ....................................................................................
waste (5) Number of containers .....................................................................................
I certify that I have received the waste as described in A and B above.
C The waste was delivered in vehicle ......................................................................
(Registration No.) at ................................................................................... (time)
on ....................................................................................... (date) and the carrier
Disposer’s gave his/her name as ...........................................................................................
Certificate on behalf of............................................................................................................
The waste shall be disposed off as per disposal licence issued by the Authority.
Signed: .................................................................................................................
Name: ...................................................................................................................
Position: ................................................................................................................
Date: .....................................................................................................................
On behalf of: .........................................................................................................
Form IV (Regulation 10)
[FORM NEMA/WM/4]
(To be completed in Triplicate)
APPLICATION/RENEWAL FOR A LICENCE TO OWN/OPERATE A WASTE
TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL SITE
I hereby apply for a licence to own/operate a waste treatment plant/disposal site, of which
particulars are given below:—
Name and address of applicant ............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
PIN Number ..........................................................................................................................................

-- 186 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
187 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE, FORM IV—continued
Location and district of plant/site ..........................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Approval of Town/Country Planning Authority ......................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Types of waste to be disposed of at plant/site ......................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Quantity being disposed of/per annum: tonnes/kg. ..............................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Type of facilities/treatment to be carried on at plant/site:
(a) Land fill ...........................................................................................................................................
(b) Compost .........................................................................................................................................
(c) Incinerator ......................................................................................................................................
Other (specify) ......................................................................................................................................
Estimated life span of plant/site ............................................................................................................
Proposed hectarage/area of plant/site (include plan or designs) .........................................................
Executive summary of environmental impact statement (please attach)
Is application for:
Initial licence Yes □ No □
Renewal Yes □ No □
Previous Licence Number ....................................................................................................................
E.I.A. Licence Number ..........................................................................................................................
Any other information ...........................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Date .................................................................... Signature: ...........................................................
Designation/Title: ..................................................................................................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Application received by ............................................ on .................................................. , 20 .............
Fee paid KShs. ............................................. (in words) ......................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................
Director General
National Environmental Management Authority

-- 187 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 188
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
Form V (Regulation 10)
[FORM NEMA/WM/5]
LICENCE TO OWN/OPERATE WASTE TREATMENT PLANT/DISPOSAL SITE
Licence No. WD/HW .............................................................................................................................
Name ....................................................................................................................................................
Address ................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby licensed to own/operate a treatment plant/waste disposal site: ..................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
This licence is valid from .................................................................................................. , 20 ............
to ....................................................................................................................................... , 20 ............
This licence is subject to the following conditions: ...............................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Date .................................................................... Signature ............................................................
.................................................................................................................
Director-General
National Environment Management Authority
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Regulations 7, 10 and 20.]
FEES
KSh.
1. Application for licence/permit:
(a) for transportation of waste 3,000
(b) to own/operate a waste processing plant/site 3,000
(c) to own/operate a waste disposal plant/site 3,000
(d) to export/transit waste 3,000
2. Licence/Permit
For a licence/permit to:
(a) transport waste 5,000
(b) own/operate a waste processing plant/site 40,000
(c) own/operate a waste disposal plant/site 75,000
(d) to export/transit waste 30,000

-- 188 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
189 [Issue 1]
THIRD SCHEDULE
[Regulations 19 and 35.]
STANDARD FOR TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF WASTES
(5) Classification of incinerators
Class 1: Industrial Plants Burning Waste as an Additional/Alternative Fuel
Incinerators in which the waste serves as the fuel or supplementary fuel in an
industrial process (e.g. the use of cement kilns or any other industrial boilers or furnaces
for the disposal of noxious or hazardous materials).
Class 2: Industrial incinerators
Class 2A: Commercial
Incinerators for the disposal of waste that contains hazardous, potential hazardous
and bio-medical waste where the operator exceeds 100 kg/day.
Class 2B: Small scale incinerators for Private Use
Incinerators for the disposal of hazardous, potential hazardous and bio-medical
waste where the operator does not exceed 100 kg/day.
Class 3: General waste incinerators
Incinerators for general waste that is non-toxic, non-hazardous, non-medical or does
not contain organic halogens, (i.e., selected customs, police, contraband goods, offices
waste, commercial waste and industrial wastes) where the operator does not exceed 1
ton/day.
STANDARDS, GUIDELINES, CRITERIA, PROCEDURE FOR INSTALLING/OPERATING
INCINERATORS
No. Parameter Standards, Guideline, Criteria and Procedure
An approved plant must have four distinct sections that demonstrate
three principles of turbulence, residence, time and temperature are
inbuilt in the plant design. The regulated sections may include but are
not limited to:
• Overall plant layout;
• Feed chamber/charging;
• Primary Combustion Chamber;
• Secondary Combustion Chamber;
• Particulate Scrubbers;
• Acid Gas Scrubbers;
1 Basic Plant Design
• The stack/chimney.
Controlled hygienic, mechanical or automatic feeding methods have
to be used which will not influence the air temperature in the
primary and secondary chambers of the incinerator negatively.
No waste is to be fed into the incinerator:
1. Until the minimum temperatures have been reached;
2. If the minimum combustion temperatures are not maintained;
3. Whenever the previous charge has not been completely
combusted in the case of batch feeding;
2 Feeding and Charging
4. Until such time as the addition of more waste will not cause the
design parameters of the incinerator to be exceeded.

-- 189 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 190
THIRD SCHEDULE—continued
No. Parameter Standards, Guideline, Criteria and Procedure
The primary combustion chamber must:
1. be accepted as the primary combustion zone;
2. be equipped with a burner/s burning gas/fuel or low sulphur
liquid fuels. Other combustion methods will be judged on
merits;
3. ensure primary air supply is controlled efficiently;
3 Primary Combustion
Chamber
4. ensure minimum exit temperature is not less than 850°C.
The secondary combustion chamber must:
1. be accepted as secondary combustion zone;
2. be fitted with secondary burner/s burning gas or low sulphur
liquid fuel or any suitable fuel;
3. ensure secondary air supply is controlled efficiently;
4. ensure flame contact with all gases is achieved;
5. ensure residence time is not less than two (2) seconds;
6. ensure the gas temperature as measured against the inside
wall in the secondary chamber and not in the flame zone, is not
less than 1100°C;
7. ensure the oxygen content of the emitted gases is not less than
11%;
4 Secondary
Combustion Chamber
(Afterburner).
8. ensure both primary and the combustion temperatures are
maintained until all waste has been completely combusted.
A mechanical particulate collector must be incorporated after
secondary combustion chamber for removal of particulate pollutants
entrained in the flue gas stream. The particulate collectors may
include any of the following or a combination thereof:
1. cyclone separator;
2. electrostatic precipitators;
5 Particulate Removers
3. fabric filters.
1. The chimney should have a minimum height of 10 meters
above ground level and clear the highest point of the building
by not less than 3 meters for all roofs. The topography and
height of adjacent buildings within 50 meters radius should be
taken into account.
2. If possible the chimney should be visible to the operator from
the feeding area.
3. The addition of dilution air after combustion in order to achieve
the requirement of these guidelines is unacceptable.
4. The minimum exit velocity should be 10 m/s and at least twice
the surrounding wind speed (Efflux velocity = wind speed x 2)
whichever is higher to ensure no down washing of exiting
gases.
6 Chimney/Stack
5. Point for the measurement of emissions shall be provided.
1. Instrument for determining the inside wall temperature and not
burner flame temperature must be provided for both primary
and secondary chambers.
7 Instrumentation
2. An audible and visible alarm must be installed to warn the
operator when the secondary temperature drops to below the
required temperature.

-- 190 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
191 [Issue 1]
THIRD SCHEDULE—continued
No. Parameter Standards, Guideline, Criteria and Procedure
3. In addition to the above the following instruments may also be
required.
• A carbon monoxide and/or oxygen meter/recorder.
• A smoke density meter/recorder.
• A gas flow meter/recorder.
• A solid particulate meter/recorder.
Any other instrument or measurement that may be considered
necessary.
1. Must be sited in accordance with the relevant local municipal
authority planning scheme, the topography of the area and be
compatible with premises in the neighbourhood.
8 Location/Siting
2. Must be housed in a suitably ventilated room.
1. Combustion efficiency:
Combustion efficiency (CE) shall be at least 99.00%;
The Combustion efficiency is computed as follows;
C.E = % CO 2 x 100
% CO 2 + CO
2. The temperature of the primary chamber shall be 800 ± 50°C.
3. The secondary chamber gas residence time shall be at least 1
(one) second at 1050 ± 50°C, with 3% oxygen in the stack gas.
4. Opacity of the smoke must not exceed 20% viewed from 50
metres with naked eyes.
5. All the emission to the air other than steam or water vapour
must be odourless and free from mist, fume and droplets.
6. The Authority may require that the certificate holder have tests
carried out by an accredited institution to determine stack
and/or ground level concentrations of the following substances.
Cadmium and compounds as Cd
Mercury Hg
Thallium Tl
Chromium Cr
Beryllium Be
Arsenic As
Antimony Sb
Barium Ba
Lead Pb
Silver Ag
Cobalt Co
Copper Cu
Manganese Mn
Tin Sn
Vanadium V
9 Emission Limits
Nickel Ni

-- 191 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 192
THIRD SCHEDULE—continued
No. Parameter Standards, Guideline, Criteria and Procedure
Hydrochloric HCL
Hydrofluoric acid HF
Sulphur dioxide SO2
7. A 99.99% destruction and removal efficiency (DRE) for each
principal organic hazardous constituent (POHC) in the waste
feed where:
DRE = [(Win – Wout)/Win]*100
Where:
Win = mass feed rate of the POHC in the waste stream fed to
incinerator, and
Wout = mass emission rate of POHC in the stack prior to the
release into the atmosphere.
8. The average dioxin and furan concentration in the emissions
should not exceed 80ng/m 3 total dioxins and furans if measured
for a period of 6 to 16 hours.
Note:
b All pollutant concentrations must be expressed at O°C and
1.013 x 105 N/m2 , dry gas and 11% oxygen correction.
• Oxygen correction is computed as:
ES = 21 – O S x EM
21 – O M
Where:
ES = Calculated emission concentration at the standard
percentage oxygen concentration.
EM = Measured emission concentration.
Os = Standard oxygen concentration.
O M = measured oxygen concentration.
1. Materials destined for incineration should be of known origin
and composition and must be only incinerated in a furnace that
is registered for the particular type of waste.
2. A record must be kept of the quantity, type and origin of the
waste to be incinerated.
3. The incinerator must be preheated to working temperature
before charging any waste.
4. The incinerator must not be overcharged.
5. The incinerator must be in good working order at all times and
must not be used if any component fails. Any malfunction
should be recorded in a log book and reported to the relevant
authority.
10 Operation
6. The incinerator operator and all relevant staff must be trained to
the satisfaction of the relevant control authority.
The site where the incinerator is built must:
1. have running water;
2. have a solid floor;
3. have lighting if 24hrs operation;
11 Housekeeping
4. have fly ash containerization and storage before disposal.

-- 192 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
193 [Issue 1]
THIRD SCHEDULE—continued
No. Parameter Standards, Guideline, Criteria and Procedure
1. Staff handling waste must be well trained on safe handling of
hazardous wastes.
2. Staff must be provided with appropriate protective gear such as
gas masks, aprons, gumboots, helmets, gloves, goggles.
3. Caution and Warning signs must be provided.
4. Fire-fighting equipment must be provided.
12 Health & Safety
(Protective Gear)
5. There should be no smoking or eating on the site.
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 16.]
WASTES CONSIDERED HAZARDOUS
The following wastes shall be considered hazardous wastes—
Y0 All wastes containing or contaminated by radio-nuclides the concentration of
properties of which result from human activity.
Y2 Wastes generated from medical care and/or medical examination in
hospitals, clinics, elderly medical care centers and maternity wards and in
medical care centers and wastes from medical examination in medical
examination laboratories.
Y3 Waste pharmaceuticals, drugs and medicines.
Y4 (a) Wastes generated from the production and import of the chemicals
including germicides, fungicides, bactericides, ratcides, herbicides and
other chemicals for prevention of the breeding and extermination of
animals, plants and viruses; and growth promoting chemicals,
germination control and other chemicals for the promotion and
suppression of physiological activities of plants (hereafter referred to
as “biocides, etc.”).
(b) Wastes generated from formulation of biocides, etc. for sales and
grant.
(c) Wastes generated from sales and use of biocides, etc.
Y5 (a) Wastes generated from the production and import of decay-preventing
agents, insect control agents and other chemicals for wood
preservation (hereafter referred to as “wood preserving chemicals”).
(b) Wastes generated from formulation of wood preserving chemicals for
sales and grant.
(c) Wastes generated from sales and use of wood preserving chemicals.
Y6 (a) Wastes generated from the production and import of organic solvents.
(b) Wastes generated from formulation of organic solvents for sales and
grants.
(c) Wastes generated from sales and use of organic solvents.
Y7 Wastes from heat treatment and tempering operations containing cyanides.
Y8 Waste mineral oils unfit for their originally intended use.
Y9 Waste oils/water, hydrocarbons/water mixtures, emulsions.

-- 193 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 194
Y10 Waste substances and articles containing or contaminated with
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) and/or Polychlorinated Triphynyls (PCTs)
and/or Polybrominated Biphenyls (PBBs).
Y11 (a) Waste tarry residues arising from refining, distillation and any parlytic
treatment.
(b) Wastes generated from formulation of inks, etc. for sales and grant.
Y12 (a) Wastes generated from the production and import of inks, dyes,
pigment paints, lacquers and varnishes (hereafter referred to as “inks,
etc.”).
(b) Wastes generated from formulation of inks, etc. for sales and grant.
Y13 (a) Wastes generated from production and import of resins, latex,
plasticizers, glues/adhesives (hereafter referred to as “resins, etc.”).
(b) Waste generated from formulation of resins, etc. for sales and grant.
(c) Wastes generated form sales and use of resins, etc.
Y14 Waste chemical materials arising from research and development or teaching
activities, in the following facilities, which are not identified and/or are new
and whose effects on man and/or the environment are not known—
(a) Research and examination institutions owned by central and local
governments;
(b) universities, colleges, junior colleges, professional schools and their
subsidiary research and study institutions, and
(c) institutions for research and development of products and technologies.
Y15 Wastes of an explosive nature not subject to the Explosives Act, Cap. 115.
Y16 (a) Wastes generated from the production and import of sensitive
chemicals and materials for photographs (hereafter referred to as
“photographic chemicals, etc.”).
(b) Wastes generated from the formulation of photographic chemicals, etc.
for sales and grant.
(c) Wastes generated from the sales and use of photographic chemicals,
etc.
Y17 Wastes resulting from the surface treatment of metals and plastics.
Y18 Residues arising from industrial waste disposal operations.
Y19 Wastes containing metal carbonyls listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight or any of the following metal
carbonyls—
Iron-pentacarbonyl, Nickel-tetracarbonyl, Methyl cyclopentadienyl
manganese-tricarbonyl;
(b) wastes containing other metal carbonyls.
Y20 Wastes containing beryllium and/or beryllium compounds listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
beryllium and/or beryllium compounds—
Beryllium, Beryllium chloride, Beryllium oxide, Beryllium nitrate, Beryllium
hydroxide, Beryllium flouride, Beryllium sulfate;
(b) wastes containing other beryllium and/or beryllium compounds.

-- 194 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
195 [Issue 1]
Y21 Wastes containing hexavaleut chromium compounds listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the follow
hexavalent chromium compounds—
Chromium oxychloride, Chromic acid solution, Zinc chromate,
Potassium zinc chromate, Potassium chromate, Silver chromate,
Strontium chromate, Sodium chromate, Lead chromate, Barium
chromate, Bismuth chromate, Chromosulphuric acid, Chromium
trioxide, Anhydroulic, Ammonium dichromate, Potassium dichromate,
Sodium dichromate, Lead chromate molybdate sulfate;
(b) wastes containing other hexavalent chromium compounds;
(c) wastes to be exported for the purpose of DI to D4 or R10 of Annex IV
of the Basel Convention which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards determined by the relevant lead agency.
Y22 Wastes containing copper compounds listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
copper compounds—
Copper acetoarsenite, Copper N, N = Ethylenebis (saricylideneaminate),
Cuprous chloride, Cupric chloride, Copper cyanide, Sodium
cuprocyanide, Cupriethylenediamine solution, Copper arsenate, and
Copper sulfate;
(b) waste containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
compounds—
Copper (II) diammonium chloride dihydrate, Potassium cupric chloride,
Copper acetate, Potassium cuprocyanide, Cupric nitrate, Cupric
carbonate, Cuprous thiacyanate, Copper pyrophoste, Cupric fluoride
and Cuprous iodide;
(c) wastes containing copper compounds other than those listed in (a) and
(b) above;
(d) wastes in solid form to be exported for the purpose of R10 of Annex IV
of the Basel Convention, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards in terms of copper compounds.
Y23 Wastes containing zinc compounds listed as follows—
(a) Wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following zinc
compounds—
Zinc dithionite, Zinc arsenite, Zinc chloride, Zinc cyanide, Zinc
arsenate;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following zinc
compounds—
Zinc chlorate, Zinc peroxide, Zinc permanganate, Zinc chromate, Zinc
fluorosilicate, Zinc acetate, Diethlyl zinc, 2, 5-Diethoxy 4-
morpholinobenzenediazonium zinc chloride, Dimethyl zinc, 4-
Dimethylamino-6-(2-dimethyaminoethoxy) toluence -2-diazonium zinc
chloride, Zinc oxalate, Zinc bromate, Zinc nitrate, Zinc thiocyanate, 3-
(2-Hydroxyethoxy) 4-pyrrolidin- 1-ylbenzenediazonium zinc chloride,
Zinc, Pyrophosphate, Zinc Fluoride, 4-{Benzyl(ethyl) amino}-3-
ethoxybenzenediazonium zinc chloride 4-{Benzyl 9methyl) amino}- 3-
etlioxybenzenediazonium zinc chloride, Zinc methylthiocarbamate,
Zinc sulfate, Zinc phosphide, Zinc phosphate;
(c) wastes containing zinc compounds other than those listed in (a) and
(b) above;

-- 195 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 196
(d) wastes containing arsenic and/or arsenic compounds listed as follows:
Y24 Wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
arsenic and/or arsenic compounds—
(a) Arsenic, Copper acetoarsenite, Zinc arsenite, Calcium arsenite, Silver
arsenite, Strontium arsenite, Ferric arsenite, Copper arsenite, Sodium
arsenite, Lead arsenite, Alkylarsenic compounds, Ethyldichloroarsine,
Cacodylic acid, Sodium cacodylate, Diarsenic pentoxide, Arsenic
pentaflouride, Arsenic trichloride, Arsenous trioxide, Arsenic tribromide,
Acia managenese arsenate, Arsenic trifluoride, Diphenylamine
chloroarsine, Diphenylchloroarsine, Tetrarsenic tatrasulfide, Vinyzene,
Arsenic acid, Zinc arsenate, Ammonium arsenate, Potassium arsenate,
Calciul arsenate, Sodium arsenate dibasic, Calcium arsenate, Ferrous
arsenate, Mercuric ferric arsenate, Copper arsenate, Sodium arsenate,
Lead arsenate, Magnesium arsenate, Calcium arsenate flouride,
Benzenearsonic acid, Potassium Metaarsenite, Sodium metaarsenite,
Calcium methanearsonate, Ferric methanearsonate, Arsenic disulfide,
Arsenic trisulfide;
(b) wastes containing arsenic and/or arsenic compounds other than those
listed in (a) above;
(c) wastes to be exported for the purpose of D1 to D4 or R10 of Annex IV
of the Basel Convention, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards in terms of arsenic and/or arsenic compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the waste water
discharge standards in terms of arsenic and/or arsenic
compounds;
(d) wastes to be exported for the purposes other than those listed in (c)
above and which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the standards
determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of arsenic
and/or arsenic compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the effluent quality
standards in terms of arsenic and/or arsenic compounds.
Y25 Wastes containing selenium and/or selenium compounds listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
selenium and/or selenium compounds—
Selenium, Sodium selenite, Selenium oxychloride, Selenium chloride,
Selenic acid, Sodium selenite, Selenium dioxide, Selenium disulphide,
cadmium red;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
selenium and/or selenium compounds—
Selenious acid, Barium selenite, Ferrous selenide;
(c) wastes containing selenium and/or selenium compounds other than
those listed in (a) and (b) above.
Y26 Wastes containing cadmium and/or cadmium compounds listed as follows—
(5) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
cadmium and/or cadmium compounds—
Cadmium, Cadmium Chloride, Cadmium acetate, Dihydrate, Cadmium
oxide, Cadmium cyanide, Dimethyl cadmium, Cadmium bromide,

-- 196 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
197 [Issue 1]
Cadmium nitrate, Cadmium hydroxide, Cadmium stearate, Cadmium
carbonate, Cadmium iodide, Cadmium laurate, Cadmium sulfate,
Cadmium yellow, Cadmium red;
(b) wastes containing cadmium and/or cadmium compounds other than
those listed in (a) above;
(c) wastes to be exported for the purpose of D1 to D4 or RI0 of Annex IV
of the Basel Convention, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards in terms of cadmium and/or cadmium compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet waste water discharge
standards to soil in terms of cadmium and/or cadmium
compound;
(d) wastes to be exported for purposes other than those listed in the 8
above which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet standards to be
determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of cadmium
and/or cadmium compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the effluent quality
standards in terms of cadmium and/or cadmium compounds.
Y27 Wastes containing antimony and/or antimony compounds listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
antimony and/or antimony compounds—
Sodium antimonate, Lead antimonate, Antimony pentachloride,
Antimonypentoxide, Antimonypentaflouride, Antimony trichloride,
Antimony trioxide, Potassium hexahydroxoantimonate (V), Antimony
trifluoride, Potassiumantimonyl tartrate, Antimony lactate,
Sodiummetaantimonate;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of antimony;
(c) wastes containing antimony and/or antimony compounds other than
those listed in (a) and (b) above.
Y28 Wastes containing tellurium and/or tellurium compounds listed as follows—
(a) Wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
tellurium and/or tellurium compounds—
Tellurium, Diethyl tellurium, Dimethyl tellurium;
(b) wastes containing tellurium and/or tellurium compounds other than
those listed in the (a) above.
Y29 Wastes containing mercury and/or mercury compounds listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
mercury and/or mercury compounds—
Mercury, Mercury benzoate, Ethylmercury chloride, Mercurous
chloride, Mercuric chloride, Mercury ammonium chloride,
Methylmercuric chloride, Mercuric oxycyanide, Mercury oleate,
Mercury gluconate, Mercury acetate, Mercury salicylate, Mercuric
oxide, Mercury cyanide, Mercury potassium cyanide, Diethyl mercury,
Dimethyl mercury, Mercury (1) bromide, Mercurous nitrate, Mercuric
nitrate, Phenryl mercuric hydroxide, Mercuric thiocyanate,
Mercuricarsenate, Mercury (II) iodide, Mercury potassium iodide,
Mercury fulminate, Mercury suphide, Mercurous sulfate, Mercuric
sulphate;

-- 197 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 198
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
mercury and/or mercury compounds—
Mercury nucleate, Mercurous acetate, Phenylmercury acetate,
Phenylmercuric nitrate, Thimerosal;
(c) wastes containing mercury and/or mercury compounds other than
those listed in (a) and (b) above;
(d) wastes to be exported for the purpose of D1 to D4 or R10 of Annex IV
of the Basel Convention, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of
mercury and/or mercury compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the waste water
discharge standards to soil in terms of mercury and/or mercury
compounds;
(e) wastes to be exported for the purposes other than those listed in (d)
above and which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the standards
determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of mercury
and/or mercury compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the effluent quality
standards in terms of mercury and/or mercury compounds.
Y30 Wastes containing thallium and/or thallium compounds listed as follows—
(a) Waste, containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of (lie following
thallium arid/or thallium compounds—
Thallium chlorate, Thallium acetate, Thallic oxide, Thallium bromide,
Thallous nitrate, Thallium iodide, Thallium sulphate;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of thallium.
(c) wastes containing thallium and/or thallium compounds other than those
listed in (a) and (b) above.
Y31 Wastes containing lead and/or lead compounds listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following lead
and/or lead compounds—
Lead, Lead azide, Lead arsenite, Lead monoxide, Lead chloride, Basic
lead silicate, Lead perchlorate, Lead chromate, Lead silicate, Lead
acetate, Tribasic lead sulfate, Lead cyanamide, Tetraalkyllead, Lead
cyanide, Lead tetroxide, Lead nitrate, Lead hydroxide, Lead styphnate,
Lead stearate, Lead carbonate, Lead naphtenate, Calcium plumbate,
Dibasic lead sulfite, Dibasic lead phosphite, Lead srearate dibasic,
Basic lead phthalate, Lead dioxide, Lead flouroborate solution, Lead
phosphite dibasic, Lead arsenate, Lead flouride, Lead metaborate,
Lead methanesuphonate, Lead iodide, Lead sulphate, Lead iodide,
Lead sulfate, Lead chromate molybdate sulphate;
(b) wastes containing lead and/or lead compounds other than those listed
in (a) above;
(c) wastes to be exported for the purpose of D1 or D4 or R10 in Annex IV
of the Basel Convention, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of
lead and/or lead compounds;

-- 198 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
199 [Issue 1]
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the waste water
discharge standards to soil in terms of lead and/or lead
compounds;
(d) wastes to be exported or imported for purposes other than those listed
in (c) above, which can not meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the standards
determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of lead and/or
lead compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the effluent quality
standards in terms of Lead and or Lead compounds.
Y32 Wastes containing inorganic flourine compound excluding calcium  enzene
listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
inorganic flourine compounds—
Flourosilicic acid, Bromide pentaflouride, Bromide trifluoride, Bromide
trifluoride dihydrate, Pottasium biflouride, Difluorphosphoric acid,
Ammonium fluoride, Potassium fluoride (spray dide), Chromic fluoric,
Hydrofluoride, Ammonium hydrogenfluoride, Hydrofluoric acid, Sodium
fluoride, Fluorosulphonic acid, Fluorophosphoric acid, Anhydrous
hexafluorophosphoric acid, Fluobolic acid;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
inorganic fluorine compounds—
Ammonium fluoroborate, Ammoniumfluorosilicate, Barium floride,
Barium fluorosilicate, Iodine pentafluoride, Lithium borofluoride,
Magnesium borofluoride, Magnesium fluorosilicate, Manganese
fluorosilicate, Potassium fluoroborate, Potassium fluorosilicate,
Potassium hydrogen fluoride, Sodium fluorosilicate, Sodium hydrogen
flouride, Stannous fluoride, Sodium fluoroborate, Zinc fluorosilicate;
(c) wastes containing inorganic flourine compounds other than those listed
in (a) and (b) above.
Y33 Wastes containing inorganic cyanides listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
inorganic cyanides—
Cyanogen bromide, Hydrogen cyanide, Hydrocyanic acid aqueous,
Lead cyanide, Mercury cyanide, Mercuric potassium cyanide, Nickel
cyanide, Potassium cyanide, Silver cyanide, Sodium cupro cyanide,
Sodium cyanide, Zinc cyanide;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
inorganic cyanides—
Barium cyanide, Barium platinum cyanide, Calcium cyanide, Copper
cyanide, Potassium cobalt cyanide, Potassium cupro cyanide;
Potassium gold cyanide, Potassium nickel cyanide;
(c) wastes containing inorganic cyanide other than those listed in (a) and
(b) above;
(d) wastes to be exported or imported for the purpose of D1 to D4 or R10
of the Basel Convention which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of
inorganic cyanide;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the waste water
discharge standards to soil in terms of inorganic cyanide;

-- 199 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 200
(e) wastes to be exported or imported for the purposes other than those
listed in (d) above, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) waste in solid form, which cannot meet the standards determined
by the relevant lead agency for hazardous wastes in terms of
inorganic cyanide;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the effluent quality
standards in terms of inorganic cyanide.
Y34 Acidic solutions or acid in solid form with pH value of 2.0 or less, or basic
solutions or bases in solid form with pH value of 11.5 or more by weight (in
case of substances in solid form, pH value of the solution of water-substance
has a ratio 1:3 in weight).
Y35 Basic solutions or bases in solid form.
Y36 Wastes containing asbestos in the form of dust or fibres.
Y37 Wastes containing organic phosphorus compounds listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
organic phosphorus compounds—
Azinphos-ethyl, Azinphos-methyl, Butyl phosphorotrithionate,
Carbophenothion, Chlorfenvinphos (I SO), Chlormephos, S{ (6-Chloro-
2-oxo-3-brenzosyazolyl) methyl} 0, 0-diethyl phosphorodithioate,
Chlorthiophos, Camaphos, Cresyldiphenyl Phosphote, Crotoxyphos,
Crufomate, Demephion, Demeton-O-methyl, Demeton-S-methyl,
Dialifos, Dichlofenthion, Dichloromethylphosphine, Dicrotophos, 0, 0-
Diethyl-S-2 (ethylthio) ethyl phosphorodithioate, Diethyl = 4-
nitobenzylaphosphonate, 0-0-Diethyl-0 (5-phenyl-3-isooxazolyl)
phosphorothioate, 0, 0-Diethyl-0-3,5,6-trichloro-2-
pyriylnphosphorothioate, Dimefox, 0, 0-Dimethyl-S (1,2-etylthioethyl
phosphodithioate, Dimethyl 2,2-dichlorovinylphospate, Dimethyl
etylthicethyl dithiophosphate, Dimethylhydrogen phosphite
Dimethylmethylcarbonylethylthioethyl thiophosphate, 0-0-Dimethyl N-
methylcarbamoyl-methyl dithiophosphate, Dimethyl-S-(N-methyl-N-
formoylcarbamoylmethyl) dithiophosphate 0, 0-Dimethyl-0{3-methyl-4-
(methylthio) phenyl} thiophosphate, 0-0-Dimethyl-0-(3-methyl-4-
nitrophny) thiophosphate, 0-0-Dimethyls-S-(phenylaceticacidethylester)
dithiophosphate, 0, 0-Dimethy phthaloimid methylthiophosphate,
Diomethylthiophosphory chloride, Dimethyl 2,2,2-richloro-1
hydroxyethyl phosphorate, Dioxathiory, Diphenyl-2, 4,6-
trimethylbenzoylphosphine-oxide, Edifenphos, Endothior Ethion,
Ethoatemethyl, Ethoprophos, 0-Ethyl-0-p-
nitrophenylthionobenzenephosphate, Fenamiphos, Fensulfothion,
Fonofos, Hexaethyl tetraphosphate, Hexamethylphosphoric triamide,
Heptenophos, Isodecyl diphenylphosphate 2-Isopropy 1-4
methylpryrimidyl 6-diethylthiophosphate, Isothioate, Mecarbam,
Menazon, Mephosfolan Methamidophos, 2-Methos-4H-1,3,4-
thiadiazolyl-(3)-methyl} dimethyl phospholothiolothionate, Methyl
parathion, Methyltrithion, Mevinphos Naled, Omethoate, Oxydisulfoton,
Oxydemetonmethyl, Paraoxon, Parathion, Pirimiphosethly,
Phenkapton, Phorate, Phosfolan, Phosphamidon, Prothoate,
Propaphos, Pyrazophos, Pyrazoxon, Quinalphos, Scharadan,
Sulprofos, Tetraethyl dithiopyrophosphate, Thionazin, Temephos,
Terbfos, Tris (1-aziridinly) phosphine oxide, Triamiphos, Triazophos,
Trichloronate, Triethylphosphate Tris (1-aziridinly) phosphine sulphide,
Tris (4-methoxy-3, 5 dimethylpehnyl) phosphine, Trixyly phosphate,
Tributyl phosphates-S-3- (dimethoxyphosphinyloxy)-N-methylics-
crotonamide, Di-(ethylhexyl) phospholic acid, Di-(ethylhexyl)
phosphoric acid, Triallyl phosphate, Tricresyl phosphate, Tri
(isoropylphenyl) phosphate, Tri (2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate;

-- 200 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
201 [Issue 1]
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following organic
phosphorus compounds—
Amidothiaate, Bialaphos, 0-4-Bromo-2-chlorophenyl-0-ethyl-S-phopyl
phosphorotioate, Bromophosethyl, Butamifos, 0-Buthyl-S-benzyl-S-
ethyl phosphorodithioate, 2-chloro-1-(2,4 dichlorophenyl) vinyldiethyl
phosphate, DEF, Demeton, Demeton-0, Dialkyl phosphodithioate, 0-2,
4-Dichlorophenyl-0-ethyl-S- propylphosphrodithioate, Diethyl-S-benzyl
thiophosphate, Diethyl-4-chlorophenylmercaptoethyldithiophosphate,
Diethyl-(1,3 dithiocyclopentylidene) thiophosphoramide, Diethyl-4
methylsulfinylphenyl-thiophosphate, 0, 0-Diethyl-0- (3-oxo-2-phenyl-
2H-pyridazin-6-yl) phosphorothionate Diethyl-paradimethylamino
sulfonylphenylthio phosphate, Diethylthiophosphorylchrolide, 0, 0-
Diisopropyl-S-benzylthiophosphate, Diisopropyl-S-(ethylsulfinylmethyl)-
dithiophosphate, Dimethyl-S-pchlorophenylthiophosphate, 0, 0-
Dimethyl-0-4 cyanophenyl phosphorothioate, 2,3
(Dimethyldithiophosphro) paradioxan, 0, 0-0-Dimethyl-S-2
(ethylsulfiny)-isopropyl-thiophosphate, Dimethyl-{2-(1-
methylbenzyloxycarbonyl)-1-methylethylen)-phosphate 0, 0-Dimethyl
0-0 (3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridinyl) phosphorothioate, Ehtyl-2-
dichlorophenylthionobenzene phosphorate, 0-6-Ethoxy-2-
ethylpirimidinyl-0, 0-dimethyl-phosphorothioate, Fosthiazate, Leptopho
Mesulfenfos, Meythylcyclohexyl-4-chlorophenylthiophosphate,
Octyldiphenyl, Phosphate, Phenylphosphonic dichloride,
Phenylphosphoro thiodichloride, Piperophos, Propetamphos,
Pyraclofos, Sulfote Tetraethylpyrophosphate, Temivinphos,
Tributoxyethyl phosphate, Tributyl phosphine, S,S,S-Tributyl
phosphorotrithioate, Trietylphosphate Trimethys phosphate, Trimethyl
 enzene  , Trioctyl phosphate Tris (chloroethyl) phosphate, Tris (B-
chlorophropyl) phosphate, Tris (dichloropropyl) phosphate;
(c) wastes containing organic phosphorus compounds other than those
listed in (a) and (b) above;
(d) wastes to be exported for the purpose of D1 and D4 or R10 of Annex
IV of the Basel Convention, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of
organic phosphorus compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the waste water
discharge standards to oil in terms of organic phosphorus
compounds;
(e) wastes to be exported for the purposes other than those listed in (d)
above, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the standards
determined by the relevant lead agency in terms of organic
phosphorous compounds;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet effluent quality
standards in terms of organic phosphorus compounds.
Y38 Wastes containing organic cyanides listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
organic cyanides—
Acetone cyanhydrin, Acrylonitrile, Adiponitrile, 2-Amino-5 (2-chloro-4-
nitrophenylazo) 4-methyl-3-thiophenecarbonitrile, 2,2 B Azobis-{2-
(hydroxymethyl) proprienitrile} 2,2, B Azobis B (methylbutyronitrile),
Benzonitrile, Bromobenzylcyanides., Bromoxynil, 3-Chloro-4-
methylphenyl isocyanate, Cyanazine, a-Cyano-3-phenoxybenzyl-bis

-- 201 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 202
(trifluoromethyl) methyl 1-(3,4-isopropylidene) butene-1, 4-
decarboxylate, Cyclohexyl isocyanate, 2,6-Dichlorobenzonitrile,
dichlorophenylisocyanate, 3,3, B Dimethyl-4-4 B
biphenylenediisocyanate, Diphenylmethane-4, 4-diisocyanate,
Ethylene cyanhydrin, Fenpropathrin, Ioxynyl, Isophor diisocyanate,
Lactonitrile, Melononitrile, Methacrylonitrile, Met isocyanate
Phenylacetonitrile, Phenyl isocyanate, O-phthalodinitrile, Propionitrile,
Trimethylhexamethylene diisacyanate, Tolylenediisocyanate;
(b) waste containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following organic
cyanides—
Acrylonitrile, 2,2 B Azobis isobutyronitrile, 2,2 B Azobis (2,4-dimethyl-
4-methoxyvaleronitrile) 1,1, - B Azobis (2,4-(hexahydrobenzonitrile),
Butyronitrile, N-cyanoethyl-monochloroacetoamide, Cyanofenphos
(CYP), (RS)-a-cyanophenoxybenzyl, Cyhalothrin, Cyphenothrin,
Cyfluthrin, 2, Dibromopropionitrile, 2-Dimethylaminoacetonitryl, Ethyl
cyanoacetate, Ethyl isocyanate, Fluvalinate, Hexamethylene
diisocyanate, Isobut isocyanate, Isobutyronitrile,
Isocyanatobenzotrifluoride, Isoprop isocyanate, Methoxymethyl
isocyanate, Methyl isothiocyanate, 3-(N-Nitrosomethylamino)
propionitrile, N-Propyl isocyanate, Terephthalonitrile, Tralomethrin,
1,2,5-Trithiocycloheptadiene-3,4,6,7-Tatranitrile (TCH);
(c) wastes containing organic cyanides other than those listed in (a) and
(b) above.
Y39 Wastes containing phenol and/or phenol compounds—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
phenol and/or phenol compounds—
2-Aminoanthraquinon, 7-Amoni-4-hydroxy-2 naphthalene sulfonic acid,
p-t Butylphenol, Carbolic oil, Chlorophenol, Coal tar, Cresols,
Cyclohexylaminophenol, Dichiorophenols, 2,4-dichloro-3-
methylphenol, 1,4-Dihydro-9, 10 dihydroxyanthracene, 2,4-Dinitro-6-
secbuthylphenoldimethyl acrylate, 4,6 Dinitro-O-cresol, 2,4-
Dinitrophenol, Dinoseb, Dinosebacetate, Dinoterb, Dinoterbacetate,
Dodecylphenol, O-Ethylphenol Heptyl- 1 (2,5 dimethyl-4) (2-
methylphenylazo) phenylazo-2-naphthol, Hydroxybenzene, Isoamyl
salicylate, Medinoterb, Methyl silicylate, Nitrocresols, Nitrophenols,
Nonylphenol, Nonylphenol poly (4-12) ethoxylates, Pentachlorophenol,
4-phenoxyphenol, Picric acid, Sodium pentachlorophenate,
Trichlorophenols, 2-(thiocyanatomethylthio) benzothiasol, Xylenols;
(b) waste containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following phenol
and/or phenol compounds—
2-Amino-4-chlorophenol, Aminophenols, Ammonium dinitro-O-
cresolate, Ammonium picrate, Chlorocresols, Diazodinitrophenol, 2,4-
Dinitro-cyclohexylpenol, 2,4-Dinitro-6-(1-methylpropyl) phenol
Dinitrophenolate, Alkali metals, Dinitroresorcinol, Dyes, Hydroquinone,
Hydroxysulfonic acid, N-Methylcarbamyl-2-chlorophenol (CPMC), 1
naphtho, Resorcinol, Sodium-2 4-Dichloro-6-nitrophenolate (DNCP)
Sodiumdinitro-O-cresolate, 2,4,6-Trinitroresolcinol;
(c) wastes containing phenol and/or phenol compounds other than those
listed in (a) and (b) above.
Y40 Wastes containing ethers listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
ethers—
o-Anisidine, 2-(2-aminoethoxy) ethanol, 2-Amino-dimethoxypirimidine,
a-{1-[(Allyloxy) methyl]-2(nonylphenoxy) ethyl} –w-hydroxypoli (n=1-
100) (oxyethylene), Allylglycidylether, Alkaryl polyether (C9-C20

-- 202 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
203 [Issue 1]
Alcohol (C6-C17) sec-poly (3-12) thoxylates, Alcohol (C12-C15) poly
(1-11) ethoxylates, Alcohol (C13-C1 5) lyethoxylates, 1,2-Butylene
oxide, Butyl glycidyl ether, Butyl hydroxy anisol, 2-tButyl-6-nitro-5-[p-
(1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl) phenoxy] benzoxazole, Carbofran, 4-
Chlorobenzyl-4-ethoxyphenyl ether, p-(2-Chloroethyl) anisol, m-
Chloromethylanisol, Coumafuryl, p-Cresidine, Endothal sodium, 2, 3-
Epoxy-1-propanol, 2,3-Epoxypropyl-acetate, 2-(2,3-Epoxyproyl)-6-
methoxyphenyl-acctate, a-2, 3-Epoxypropoxyphenyl-w-
hydtropoli(n=17) [2-(2,3- epoxypropoxy) benzylidene-2,3-
epoxypropoxyphenylene], Ethyleneglycol isopropyl ether,
Ethyleneglycol phenyl ether, Ethyleneglycol methylbutyl ether,
Ethyleneglycol monoacrylate, Ethyleneglycol monobutyl ether,
Ethyleneglycol monobutyl ether acetate, Ethyleneglycol monoethyl
ether, Ethyleneglycol monoethyl ether acetate, Ethyleneglycol
monomethyl ether, Ethyleneglycol monomethyl ether acetate,
Ethyleneglycol mono-n-propyl ether, Ethyl 3-ethoxypropionate, Safrole,
Propylene oxide, Di-(2chloro-iso-propyl) ether, B, B ‘-Dichloroethyl
ether, 3,3’ –Dichloro-4 4’ –diaminodiphenyl ether, 1,3-Dichloro-2-
methoxy-5-nitrobenzene, Disodium=6-(4-amino-2,5-
dimethoxyphenylazo)-3-[4-(4 amino-sulfonatephenylazo)-2, 5-
dimethoxyphenylazo]-4- hydroxy-2-naphthalenesulfonate, Diphenyl
ether, Dipropyleneglycol monobutyl ether, Dipropyleneglycol
monomethyl ether, Din-pentyl ether, Styreneoxide, Petroleum ether,
Tetrahydrofuran, Dodecylphenoxybenzene disulphonate (solns.),
Drazoxolan, Triethyleneglycol monoethyl ether, Triethyleneglycol
monomethyl ether, 2, 4, 6 Tris(chloromethyl)-1, 3, 5-trioxane, 3, 3, 3-
Trifluoro-1, 2-epoxypropane, Tripropyleneglycol monomethyl ether,
Trimethylolpropane polyethoxylate,5-[N,N-Bis(2-acetoxyethyl)aminol]-
2-(2bromo-4,6-dinitorphenylazo)-4-methoxyacetanillide, 1,6-Bis(2,3-
epoxypropoxy) naphthalene, 4,4’- Bis (,3-epoxypropoxy) biphenyl, 1,1-
Bis[p-(2,3-epoxypropoxy) phenyl] ethane, 1,1-Bis[p-(3-chloro2-
hydroxypropoxy) phenyl] ethane, Bis(chloromethyl) ether, 4,6-
Bis(difluoromethoxy)-2-methylthiopyrimidine, Tributyltin oxide,
Bisphenol A diglycidyl ether, Diglycidyl ether of Bisphenol F, Ethyl vinyl
ether, Phenylglycidylether (RS)-1-(4-Phenoxyphenoxy)-2-propanol,
Dihydro-2 (3H) – furanone, Butoxyl, Brucine, Furfural, Furfurylalcol, B-
Propiolactone, 2,3-Epoxypropyl-propyonate, Propyleneglycol
monoalkyl ether, Propyleneglycol monomethyl ether acetate, Ropoxur,
1-Bromo-4-(2,2 dimethoxyethoxy)-2,3-dimethylbenzene, 1,1’ –
[Oxybis(methylene)bis(benzene)] Polyethyleneglicol monoalkyl ether,
Methylhloromethyl ether, 2-Methoxy-2-methylpropane, 4-Methoxy-2,2’,
4’ – trimethyldiphenylamine, 1-(4-Methoxyphenoxy_-2-(2-
methylphenoxy) ethane, Morpholine, Resorcinol diglycidyl ether,
Rotenone;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
ethers—
Acetal, Anisol, N-Aminopropylmorpholine, Allilethylether, Ethylpropyl
ether, Ethyleneglycol diethyl ether, Ethyleneglycol diglycidyl ether,
Ethyleneglycol dimethyl ether, 3-Ethoxypropylamine, 1,2-Epoxy-3-
ethoxypropane, Glycidol, Chloroethyl vinyl ether, Chloromethyl ethyl
ether, Diallil ether, Diethyleneglycol dimethyl ether, Diethyleneglyco 1
monobutyl ether, Di-2-ethoxyethyl peroxydicarbonate, 3,3
Diethoxypropene, Diethoxymethane 2,5-Diethoxy-4-morpholino
benzenediazonium zinc chloride, 1,3-Dioxane, Dioxolan, 2,3 –
Dihydropylae, Diphenylsulphide, Dibutyl ether, Dipropyl ether, 4-
Dimethylamino-6 (2-dimethyaminoethoxy) toluene-2-diazonium zinc

-- 203 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 204
chloride, Dimethyldiethoxysilane, Dimethyldioxane,
Dimethoxyisopropylperoxydicarbonate, 1,1-Dimethoxyethane,
Dimethoxybutyl peroxydicarbonate, 2,2-Dimethoxypropane,
Tetrahydrofurfurylamine, Triglycol dichloride, Trinitroanisole,
Trinitrophenetole, Nitroanisol, Neopentylglycol diglycidyl ether, 3-(2-
Hydroxyethoxy)-4-pyrrolidin-1-ylbenzenediazonium zinc chloride,
Isobutyl vinylether, Phenetidines, Phenetole, Phenoxyethylacrylate,
Ethylbutyl ether, n-Butyl methyl ether, Furan, Furfurylamine,
Furfurylmercaptan, 2-Bromoethylethylether, 4-[Benzyl (ethyl) amino] -
3- ethoxybenzenediazonium zinc chloride-[Benzyl(methyl) amino]-3-
ethoxybenzenediazonium zinc chloride, Benfuracarb,
Tetrahydrofurfuryl methacrylate, Methylal, Methyltetrahydrofuran, 2-
Methylfuran, Methylpropyl ether, Methyl-3-methoxybutanol, N-
Methylmorpholine, 4-Methoxy-4-methylpentane-2-one;
(c) wastes containing ethers other than those listed in (a) and (b) above.
Y41 Wastes containing halogenated organic solvents listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
halogenated organic solvents—
Chloropropanes, Chloropropenes, Chlorobenzene, Chloroform,
Carbontetrachloride, Dichloroethanes, Dichloroethylenes,
Dichloropropanes Dichloropropenes, Dichlorobenzene,
Methylenehloride, Dibromoethanes, Tetrachloroethane,
Tetrachloroethylene, Tetrabromoethane, Tetrabromomethane,
Trichloroethanes, Trichloroethylene, Trichloro-trifluoroethane,
1,2,3Trichloropropane, 1,2,4Trichlorobenzene, Pentachloroethane;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
halogenated organic solvents—
1,1-Dichloro-1-nitroethane, 1,4-Dichlorobutane, Dichloropentanes,
Bromoform;
(c) wastes containing halogenated organic solvents other than those listed
in (a) and (b) above;
(d) wastes in liquid form to be exported for the purpose of D1 to D4 or R10
of Annex VI of the Basel Convention, which cannot meet the waste
water discharge standards to soil in terms of tetra-chloro-ethylene
and/or tri-chloro-ethylene;
(e) wastes to be exported for the purposes other than those listed in the
above (d), which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the standards
determined by the relevant lead agency for hazardous wastes in
terms of tetra-chloro-ethylene and/or tri-chloro-ethylene;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the standards of the
effluent quality standards in terms of tetra-chloroethylene and/or
tri-chloro-ethylene.
Y42 Wastes containing organic solvents excluding halogenated solvents—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
organic solvents—
Acrolein, Diisononyly adipate, Acetaldehyde, Ethyl acetoacetate,
Methyl acetoacetate, Acetophenone, Acetone, Aniline Allylalcohol,
Alkylbenzenes, benzylbenzoate, Methyl benzoate, Isoamyl alcohol,
Isooctanol, Isooctane, Isononyl alcohol, Isobutanol, Iso Butylamine, 4-
Methyl-2-pentanone, Isopropylamine, Isopropyl alcohol, Isopropyl
cyclohexane, Isopropyl toluene, 3-Methyl-2-butanone, Isopentane,
Isopentene, Isobutyric acid, Ethanolamine, Ethylanilines, Ethylamine,

-- 204 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
205 [Issue 1]
Ethylcyclohexane, N Ethyl cyclohexylamine, 2-Ethylbutanol, N
Ethylbutylamine, Ethyl-butylketone, 2-Ethyl-3-propyl acrolein, Ethyln-
propyl ketone, 2-Ethylhexanol, 2-Ethylhexylamine, Ethyl n-penthyl
ketone, 2-Butanone, Ethyleneglycol diacetate, Ethylene glycol,
Ethylenediamine, Octanol, Octane, Octanes, Formic acid, Isobutyl
formate, n-Butyl formate, Methyl formate, Quinoline, Dimethyl
succianate, Acetic acid, Isobutyl acetate, Isopropyl acetate, Isopentyl
acetate, Ethyl acetate, Ethylbutyl acetate, n-Octyl acetate, Cychlohexyl
acetate, n-Decyl acetate, n-Nonyl acetate, Vinyl acetate, 2-Phenyl
ethyl acetate, Butyl acetate, sec-Butyl acetate, n-Propyl acetate, n-
Hexyl acetate, sec-Hexy acetate, Heptyl acetate, Benzyl acetate,
Pentyl acetate, sec-Pentyl acetate, Methyl acetate, Methylpentyl
acetate, Mesityl oxide, Diisobutylamine, Diisobutyl ketone,
Diisopropanolamine, Diisopropylamine, N, N e,Diethylaminoethanol,
Diethylamine, Diethylenetriamine, Cyclohexanol, Cyclohexanone,
Cyclohexane, Cyclohexylamine, Cycroheptane, Cyclopentane,
Cyclopentene, Dicyclohexylamine, Di-n-butylamine, Dipropylamine,
Dipentene, N, N-Dimethylacetamide, N, N-Dimethylaniline,
Dimethylamino azobenzene, 2-Ddimethylaminoethanol, 2,6-Dimethyl-
4-heptanol, N, N-Dimethyl formamide, Diethyl oxalate, Camphor oil,
Styrene, Butyl stearate, Tetrahydrothiophene-1, I-dioxide, Petroleum
naphtha, Petroleum benzine, Dimethyl sebacate, Solvent naphtha,
Diethyl carbonate, Dimethyl carbonate, Decanol, Decene,
Tetraethylenepentamine, Tetrahydronaphthalene, Turpentine oil,
Dodecanol, I-Dodecylamine, Triethanolamine, Triethylamine,
Trietylenetetramine, Tributylamine, Tripropylamine, Toluidine,
Naphthalene, Nitroethane, Nitroxylenes, O-Nitrotruene,
Nitoropropanes, Nitrobenzene, Nitromethane, Ethyl lactate, Butyl
lactate, Carbon disulfide, Nonanol, Nonane, Nonene, Paraldehyde,
Methyl palmitate, Picolines, 4-Hydroxy-4-methyl-2-pentanone,
Pinenes, Pyridine, Phenyl ethyl alkyl, I-Phenyl-lxylylethane, n-Butanol,
2-Butanol, Dialkyl phtalates, Bis (diethyleneglycol) phthalate, Butyl
benzylphthalate, Butanediols, n-Butylamine, sec-Butylamine, tert-
Butylamine, 1,3-Propane sultone, Propionic acid, n-Amyl propionate,
Ethyl propionate, n-Butyl propionate, Methylpropionate, Propylamine,
Hexanol, Hexane, Hexenes, Heptanols, Heptane, n-Heptene, Benzyl
alcohol, Benzene, 1,3-Pentadiene, Pentanols, n-Pentane, Pentenes,
Formamide, White spirit, Di-n-butyl maleate, Methyl myristate,
Methanol, Methallyl alcohol, Methylamine, Methyl iso-amylketone, 7-
Methyl-l, 6-octadiene, 2-Methylcyclohexanol, Methylcyclohexanone,
Methycyclohexane, Methylcyclopentane, I-Methyl naphthalene, Methyl
n-pentyl ketone, Methyl butanol, Metju, Nitu, Letame, Methyl butanol,
2-Methyl hexane, Methyl n-hexylketone, Methyl heptyl ketone,
Methylpentanol, 2-Methyl pentane, 2-Methyl-1-pentane, 4-Methyl-1-
pentane, Ethyleneglycol monoacetate, Methyl laurate, Butyric acid,
Ethyl butyrate, Vinyl butyrate, n-Butyl butyrate, Methyl butyrate,
Ligroin, Dimethylsulfide, Dimethylsulfate;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following organic
solvents—
Allylamine, Methyl valerate, Methyl isopropenyl ketone, Isobutyl
isobutyrate, Isopropyl isobutyrate, Ethyl isobutyrate, N-Undecane,
Ethyl alcohol, N-ethyltoluidine, Allyl formate, Ethyl formate, Propyl
formate, Pentyl formate, Allyl acetate, Isopropenyl acetate, tert-Butyl
acetate, Diallilamine, Diisopropyl ketone, Diethyl ketone,
Diethylenglycol, Cyclohexene, Cycroheptene, Cycropentanol,
Cycropentanone, Dipropyl ketone, Dimethylcyclohexane, Dimethyl

-- 205 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 206
sulfoxide, 2,3-Dimethylbutane, 1,3Dimethylbutylamine, Dioctyl
sebacate, Dibutyl sebacate, Thiophene, n-Decane,
Tetrahydrothiophene, Terpinolene, Triallilamine, Trimethylene glycol,
Methyl lactate, Dimethyl disulphide, Acetyl methyl carbinol,
Vinyltoluene, Piperidine, 3-Butanol, Butylmercaptan, 1,4-Butynediol, n-
Propanol, Isopropyl propionate, Isobutyl propionate, 4-Methyl-1,3 –
dioxacyclopentan-2-one, 1,2-Propylenediamine, 2-Methyl-2,4-
pentanedil, Pentamethylheptane, Pentane-2,4-dione, Triisopropyl
borate, Ethyl borate, Trimethyl borate, Butyric anhydride, N-
methylaniline, Methyl vinyl ketone, N-Methylpiperidine, Methyl propyl
ketone, 5-Methylhexan-2-one, Isopropyl butyrate, Isopentyl butyrate,
Pentyl butyrate;
(c) wastes containing organic solvents other than those listed in (a) and
(b) above.
Y43 Any congener of Polychlorinated debenzo-foran.
Y44 Any congener of Polychlorinated dibenza-p-dioxin.
Y45 Wastes containing organohalogen compounds other than substances
referred to in this Schedule, listed as follows—
(a) wastes containing 0.1% or more by weight of any of the following
organohalogen compounds—
1-(Acetylamino)-4-bromoanthraquinone, Atrazine, 2-Amino-2-chloro-5-
nitrobenzophenone, (6R,7R)7-Amino-3-chloromethyl-8-oxo-5-thia-1-
azabic ycro(4,2,O)-octa-2-ene-2-carbonicacid=4methoxybenzyl, Methyl
aminodithio-2-chloropropionate hydrochloride, 2-Amino-
3,5dibromothiobenzamide, 2-Chloro-2’, 6’-diethyl-N-(methoxymethyl)
acetanilide, Alidochlor, Aldrin, Isodrin, Imazalil, Ethyl-3, 5-dichloro-4-
hydroxybenzoate, Ethyl-3, 5-dichloro-4-
hexadecyloxycarbonyloxybenzoate, Ethylene chlorohydrine,
Epichlorohydrin, Acetyl chloride, Anisoil chloride, Allyl chloride, Choline
chloride, Chlorinated paraffins (C10-13), Pyrosulphuryl chloride,
Benzylidene chloride, Benzyl chloride, Benzoyl chloride, Endrin,
Captafol, Canphechlor, Coumachlor, Crimidine, Chloral,
Chlordimeform, Chlordane, Chlorendic acid, Chloroacetaldehyde,
Chloroacetone, Chloroanilines, 4-Chloro-2-aminotoluene
hydrochloride, 1-Chlorooctane, 1-Chloroethylchloroformate, 1-Chloro-
3-(4-Chlorophenyl)hydrazone-z-propanol Monochloroacetic acid,
Chlorodinitrobenzene, 3-Chloro-1, 2-dibromopropane, 1-Chloro-3, 3-
dimethyl-2-butanol, Ethylchlorothioformate, 2-Chloro-5-
trifluoromethylnitrobenzene, Chlorotoluidines, Chlorotoluenes, 2-
Chloronicotinic acid, Chloronitroanilines, 4-Chloro-2-nitrotoluene, N-(2-
Chloro-3-nitro-6-pyridyl) acetamide, 4-(2-Chloro-4-nitrophenylazo)-N-
(2-cyanoethyl)-N-phenety aniline, Chloronitrobenzenes, Chloropicrin,
Chlorohydrins, Chlorophacinone, 4-Chloro-o-phenylenediamine, 3-
Chloro-2-fluoronitrobenzene 3-Chrolo-4-fluoronitrobenzene,
Chloroprene, 2-Chloropropionic acid, 3-Chloropropyonic acid, 1-
Chlorohexane, 1-Chloroheptane, p-Chlorobenzylchloride, p-
Chlorobenzotrichloride, Chloromethyl=p-tolyl=ketone, 2-(4-
Chloromethyl-4-hydroxy-2-thiazoline-2-yl guanidine=chloride, Methyl 2-
[(chloromethyl) phenyl] propionate, (2S)-3-Chloro-2-methylpropyonic
acid, (Z)-4-Chloro-2-(methoxycarbonylmethpoxyimiono)-3-oxob utyric
acid, 2-Chlorobutyric acid, Kepone, Kelevan, 1-Chroloformyl-1-
methylethyl acetate, 1-Bromoformyl-1-methylethyl acetate,
Benzotrichloride, 3,5-Diaminochlorobenzene, Diallate, Silicon
tetrachloride, Diglycol chlorohydrin, Cycrohaexenyltrichlorosilane, 3,4-
Dichloroaniline 4, 5-Dichloro-p-n-octylisothiazole-3-one, Dichloroacetic

-- 206 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
207 [Issue 1]
acid, Methyldichloroacetate, 3, 3’-Dichloro-4,4’ –
diaminodiophenylmethane, 3,5-Dichloro-4-(1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethoxy)
aniline, 1,4-Dichloro-2-trichlorosiryl-2-butee, 2,4-Dichloro-5-
trifluoromethylnitrobenzene, 1,4-Dichloro-2-nitrobenzene, 2,2-Dichloro-
5-nitrobenzophenon, 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid diethanolamine,
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid diethylamine, 2,4-
Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid triisopropanolamine, 2,4-Dichloro-3-
fluorene trobenzene, 1,3-Dichloro-4-fluorobenzene, 2,3-Dichloro-1-
propanol, 2,2-Dichloropropioniccid, Methyl 2,3-dichloropropionate,
Dichlorobromomethane, 1,6-Dichlorohexane, 2,6-Dichloro-3-
perchloromethyltluene, 4,5-Dichloro-2-perchloromethyltoluene,
Dichrolobenzidine, 2,2-Dichloro-3-pentanon, 2,4-Dichloro-3-pentanon,
2,6-Difluoroaniline, 3,4-Difluoronitrobenzene, 2-Dibromoethylene
2’(2,6-Dibromo-4nitrophenylazo)-5’-diethylaminoace toaniride, 2,3-
Dibromopropionate, Dibromomethane, Simazine, Acetyl bromide, Allyl
bromide, Sulfallate, Cyclohexyl-1-iodoethyl=carbonate, DDT
(chlorophenothane), 2,4-DB(2,4-Dichlorophenoxy) butyric acid,
Dieldrin, 2,26,6-Tetrachlorocycrohexanon 2,2’, 4,4’-
Tetrachlorobenzophenon, Tetrahedra-5, 5-Dimethyl-2(1H)pyrimidinone
[p-trifluorome thyl)-a-[p-(trifluoromethyl) styryl]Cynamiliden] hydrazone,
2,2,3,3Tetrafluoroxetane, Diuron, Telodrin, Toxaphene, 1-(4-
Chlorophenonxy)-3,3-dimethyl-1-(1H-1, 2,4triazol-1-y1)-2-butanone
Trichloroacetylchloride, 2,2,6-Trichloro-6-(1-chloroisobutyl)
cycrohexanon, Trichloroacetic acid, 2,4,6-Trichloro-1,3,5-triazine, 2,2,3
–Trichloro-3-phenyl-1, 1-propanediol, 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic
acid, Trichlorobutene, Perchloromethylmercapan, 2-Trichloromethyl-5-
(4hydroxystyryl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole, Sodium trifluoroacetate, 2,3,4-
Trifluoronitrobenzene, Nitrobenzotrifluoride, Trimethylacetylchloride,
Trimethylchlorosilane, Sodium=4-(2,4-dichloro-mtoluol)-1,3-
dimethylpyrazole-5-oleate, Nitrofen, Paraquat, 5’-tBis(2-acetoxyethyl)
amino]-2’-(2chloro-4-nitrophenylazo) acetanilide 4- (p-Bis(2-
chloroethyl) aminophenyl) butyric acid, Odomethylpivalate 2-t-Butyl-5-
chloro-6-nitro-benzooxazole, O-3-t-Butylphenyl-chlorothioformate, 2-
Chloro-1-propanol, 4-Bromo-3-oxobutyroanilide, 1-Bromo-2-
chloroethane, Ethyl bromoacetate, 3-Bromopropionic acid, Ethyl 3-
bromopropionate, (E)-3-[p-(Bromomethyl) phenyl) acrylic acid, Ethyl
(E)-3-[p-(bromomethyl) phenyl] acrylate, 3-Bromo-2-methylpropionic
acid, 4-Bromo-2methoxyimino-3-oxobutyryl=chloride,
Hexachlorocyclohexane, Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene,
Hexachlorobenzene, Heptachlor, Perfluoropropoxy-1,1,2-
trifluoroethylene, I-Benzyl-2-(chloromethyl) imidazole=chloride,
Hexachloro-hexahedra-methano-dioxathiepine oxide, N-[B-(benzol)
furan-2-yl) acrylol-N’-trichloroacetohydrazid, Pentachloronaphthalene,
Pentafluoroiodoethane, Mirex, 2-Methyl-4-chlorophenoxy-acetic acid,
Methyltrichlorosilane, 2-Methyl-3-trifluoromethylaniline,
Methylphenyldichlorosilane, Methrachlor, 2-Mercaptobenzothiazol,
Monofluoroacetic amide, Acetyl iodide, Allyl iodide, Methyl iodide, 3-
Iodopropionic acid;
(b) wastes containing 1% or more by weight of any of the following
organohalogen compounds—
Isopropyl-N-(3-chlorophenyl) carbamate (IPC), Imidacloprid,
Echlomezole, Ethychlozate, Epibromohydrin, (4-Chloro-2-
methylphenxoy) acetic acid, Isobutyryl chloride, Butyryl chloride,
Propionyl chloride, Pentyl chloride N’ –(2-Methyl-4-chlorophenyl)-N,N-
dimethylformamizine chloride, Oxadiazon, 2-Chloro-4, 5-dimethylpheyl-
N-methylcarbamate, Chlorphenamidinel-[3,5-Dichloro-4(3-chloro-5-

-- 207 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 208
trifluoromethyl-2-pyridylox y) phenyl]-3-(2, 6-difluorobenzoyl) urea,
Chlormequat, Chloroacetonitryl, Chloro acetophenone,
Chloroanisidine, Allyl chloroformate, Isobutyl chloroformate, Isopropyl
chloroformate, Ethyl chloroformate, 2-Ethylhexyl chloroformate, 2-
Ethoxyethyl chloroformate, Chloromethyl chloroformate, Cyclobutyl
chloroformate, Phenyl chloroformate, n-Butyl chloroformate, sec-Butyl
chloroformate, t-Butylcyclohexyl chloroformate, 2-Butoxyethyl
chloroformate, n-Propyl chloroformate, Benzyl chloroformate, Methyl
chloroformate, Isopropyl chloroacetate, Ethyl chloroacetate, Sodium
chloroacetate, Vinyl chloroacetate, Methyl monochloroacetate, 1-
Chloro-1,2-dibromoethane, 2-Chloropridine, Chlorobutanes, 3-Chloro-1
propanol, Glycerol a-monochlorohydrin, Isopropyl 2-chloropropionate,
Ethyl 2-chloropropionate, Methyl 2-chloropropionate, I-Chloro-3-
bromopropane, Dichlorobenzylicacid ethyl ester, p-Chlorobenzoyl
chloride, Chlorobenzotrifluorides, 1,1-Bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-
trichloroethanol, 2,4,6-Trichlorophenyl-4’-nitrophenyl ether, 1,4,5,6,7,7-
Hexachlorobicyclo(2,2,1) hept-5-ene-2,3-d carboxylic acid di-2-
propenylester, Dicloro dinitromethane, Dichlorobutyne, 1,3-
Dichloroacetone, 2,5-Dichloroaniline, 3,5-Dichloroaniline, B, B’-
Dichloroethyl hormal 1,1’-Ethylene-2, 2’dipyridiliumdibromide,
Dibromochloropropane 3,5-Dibromo-4-hydroxy-4’-nitroazobenzene
(BAB), 1,2-Dibromobutan-3-one, m-Dibromobenzen, Bromoacetone,
Isopropyl bromide, Ethyl bromide, Xylol bromide, Diphenylmethyl
bromide, Phenacyl bromide, n-Buthyl bromide, 2-Bromobutane, Benzyl
bromide, Thiochlormethyl, 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloronitoroethane, Methyl
tricloroacetate, Trichloronitroethylene, 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic
acid butoxyethylester, 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid
methoxyethylester, 2,4,6-Trinitrochlorobenzene, Trinitrofluorenone,
Trifluoroacetate acid, Trifluoromethanesulfonic acid, 2-
Trifluoromethylaniline, 3-Trifluoromethylaniline, N,N’-[1,4-
Priperazinediylbis(2,2,2,-trichloroethylidene)] bisformamide,
Nitrobromobenzene, n-Valerylchloride, Halofuginone, Isopropyl p,p’-
dibromobenzilate, Fluoroaniline, Fluoroacetic acid, Fluorotoluene,
Fluorobenzene, Fulsulfamide, Methyl bromoacetate, 3-Bromopropyne,
Bromobenzene, 2-Bromopentane, I-Bromo-3-methylbutane,
Bromomethylpropane, Hexachloroacetone, Hexachloro-1,3-
cyclopentadiene, Hexachlorophene, Hexythiazox, Permethrin,
Benzotrifluoride, Benzoate pentyltrichlorosilane, Methylallyl chloride,
Methyl bromoacetone, Sodium fluoroacetate, Monofluoroacet-p-
bromoanilide, N-(p-Bromobenzyl) monofluoroacetamide, n-Butyl
iodide, Benzyl iodide, 2-Iodobutane, Iodopropanes,
Iodomethylpropane, Hexafluoroacetone;
(c) waste containing or contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and/or polychlorinated triphenyls (PCTs) and/or
polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs) of 50 ppm or more by weight;
(d) wastes other than the organic halogen compounds given in (a), (b) and
(c) (excluding wastes listed in other items);
(e) wastes to be exported for the purpose of D1 to D4 or R10 of Annex IV
of the Basel Convention, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the Ambient Soil Quality
Standards in terms of PCB determined by the relevant lead
agency;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the waste water
discharge standards to soil in terms of PCB;

-- 208 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
209 [Issue 1]
(f) wastes to be exported or imported for purposes other than those in (e)
above, which cannot meet the following criteria—
(i) wastes in solid form, which cannot meet the standards in for
hazardous wastes in terms of PCB;
(ii) wastes in liquid form, which cannot meet the standards for
effluent quality standards in terms of PCB.
FIFTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 16.]
LIST OF HAZARDOUS CHARACTERISTICS
UN Code Characteristics Class
UN CLASS CODE CHARACTERISTICS
1 HI Explosive
An explosive substance or waste is a solid or liquid substance or
waste (or mixture of substances or wastes) which is in itself capable
by chemical reaction or producing gas at such a temperature and
pressure and at such a speed as to cause damage to the
surroundings.
3 H3 Flammable Liquids
The word “flammable” has the same meaning as “inflammable”.
Flammable liquids are liquids, or mixtures of liquids, or liquids
containing solids in solution or suspension (for example paints,
varnishes, lacquers and others but not including substances or wastes
otherwise classified on account of their dangerous characteristics)
which give off a flammable vapour at temperatures of not more than
60.5°C, closed-cup test, or not more than 65.6°C open-cup test (since
the results of open-cup tests and closed-up tests are not strictly
comparable and even individual results by the same tests are often
variable, regulations varying from the above figures to make allowance
for such difference would be within the spirit of this definition).
4.1 H4.1 Flammable Solids
Solids or waste solids, other than those classed as explosives, which
under conditions encountered in transport are readily combustible, or
may cause or contribute to fire through friction.
4.2 H4.2 Substances or wastes liable to spontaneous combustion
Substance or wastes which are liable to spontaneous heating under
normal conditions encountered in transport or to heating up on tract
with air, and being then liable to catch fire.
4.3 H4.3 Substances or wastes which, in contact with water emit flammable
gases.
Substances or wastes which, by interaction with water, are liable to
become spontaneously flammable or give off flammable gases in
dangerous quantities.
5.1 H5.1 Oxiding
Substances or wastes which, while in themselves not necessary
combustible, may generally, by yielding oxygen, cause or contribute to
the combustion of other materials.

-- 209 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 210
FIFTH SCHEDULE—continued
UN CLASS CODE CHARACTERISTICS
5.2 H5.2 Organic Peroxides
Organic substances or wastes which contain the bivalent 0-0-structure
are thermally unstable substances which may undergo exothermic self
accelerating decomposition.
6.1 H6.1 Toxic or poisonous (Acute)
Substances or wastes liable either to cause death or serious injury to
the human health if swallowed or inhaled or by skin contact.
6.2 H6.2 Infectious substances extremely hazardous to health
Substances or wastes containing viable micro-organisms or their
toxins which are known or suspected to cause disease in animals or
humans.
8 H8 Corrosives
Substances or wastes which, by chemical action, will cause severe
damage when in contact with living tissue, or in the case of leakage
will materially damage, or even destroy, other goods in the means of
transport; they may also cause other hazards.
9 H10 Liberation of toxic gases in contact with air or water
Substances or wastes which by interaction with air or water, are liable
to give out toxic gases in dangerous quantities.
9 H11 Toxic (delayed or chronic)
Substances or wastes which, by interaction with air or water, are liable
to give out toxic gases in dangerous quantities.
Substances or wastes which, if they are inhaled or ingested or if they
penetrate through the skin may involve delayed or chronic effects,
including carcinogenicity.
9 H12 Ecotoxic
Substances or wastes which, if released present or may present
immediate or delayed adverse impacts to the environment by means
of bio-accumulation and/or toxic effects upon biotic systems.
9 H13 Capable, by means, after disposal, of yielding another material e.g.
leachate which possesses any of the characteristics listed above.
10 H14 Radioactive waste
11 H15 Persistent waste; waste which contaminate the environment for long
periods of time.
12 H16 Carcinogenic wastes which may lead to development of cancer in
human beings or animals.
Corresponds to the hazardous classification system included in the United Nations
Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods (ST/SG/AC.10/1/Rev.5, United Nations
New York, 1988.

-- 210 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
211 [Issue 1]
SIXTH SCHEDULE
Form I (Regulations 20 and 21)
[FORM NEMA/WM/I]
(To be filled in triplicate)
APPLICATION FOR TRANSBOUNDARY MOVEMENT OF WASTE
(FOR EXPORT OR TRANSIT PURPOSE ONLY)
1. NOTIFIER*
Name: ................................................................. Telephone:...........................................................
Address: ............................................................. Telefax: ...............................................................
E-mail: ................................................................
Contact person (name, address, telefax, e-mail)
2. GENERATOR(S) OF WASTE
Name: ................................................................. Telephone: ..........................................................
Address: .............................................................. Telefax: ...............................................................
E-mail: ................................................................
Contact person (name, address, telephone, telefax, e-mail) ................................................................
Process by which the waste was generated: .......................................................................................
Site of generation: ................................................................................................................................
3. REASON FOR WASTE EXPORT
Why the waste cannot be disposed of in the country of origin
Why the waste has to be exported/imported through Kenya
4. WASTE
Description of the waste:
Y number H number UN class UN number:
Shipping name IWIC code
Physical state at 20°C:
Powder Solid Waste/viscous Sludge Liquid
gaseous Other (specify)
Estimated quantity (kg or l) of the shipment:
Type of packaging: ...............................................................................................................................
Number of packages: ...........................................................................................................................
Special handling requirements including emergency provisions in case of accidents:
Method of disposal:

-- 211 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 212
SIXTH SCHEDULE—continued
5. EXPORT/IMPORTER OF THE WASTE
Competent Authority and details of approval
Exporter/Importer of the waste in the country of origin/destination
Name: ..................................... Telephone: ..................................... Telefax .....................................
E-mail: ................................................................
6. DISPOSER OF WASTE
Contact person in case of emergency:
Name: ...................................... Telephone ..................................... Telefax .....................................
E-mail: ................................................................
Approximate date of disposal:
Actual site of disposal:
Signature and official stamp of disposer:
7. TRANSIT
Projected length of time the waste shipment shall be in transit in Kenya territory
Expected date of entry
Expected date of exit
Means of transport envisaged:
Information relating to insurance:
(Guarantee that the person responsible shall fully compensate any damage caused to human
health, property or the environment by the waste in question during transit.)
8. DECLARATION
I/We* ..................................................................................................................................... being the
exporter/importer* hereby declare that on ................................................ I/we entered into a contract
with the disposer and that I/we shall be bound by the terms of the said contract (attach a copy of
contract).
Signed: ...............................................................
(Exporter/Importer*)
I/We * .................................................................................................................................... being the
exporter/importer* hereby guarantee/declare that the above information is correct and true.
Signed: ...............................................................
Signed: ...............................................................
(Exporter/Importer*)
* Delete whichever is not applicable

-- 212 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
213 [Issue 1]
SIXTH SCHEDULE—continued
FORM II (Regulations 20 and 21)
[FORM NEMA/WM/II]
(To be filled in triplicate)
PERMIT TO EXPORT/TRANSIT WASTE
Permit No. .............................................................................................................................................
Name and address of exported/notifier ................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
(Physical and Mailing Address)
...............................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby granted permission to export/transit the following waste:
1. ........................................................................................................................................................
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
4. ........................................................................................................................................................
5. ........................................................................................................................................................
6. ........................................................................................................................................................
7. ........................................................................................................................................................
8. ........................................................................................................................................................
To the following address: (Name, Physical and Mailing Address of the Importer)
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
This export shall be made through .......................................................... Border/custom control post.
This Permit is valid from (date) .................................... to (date) .........................................................
This permit is subject to the following conditions: (Attach a copy of authorisation by the state to
which the export is to be made)
...............................................................................................................................................................
Date .................................................................... Signature ............................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Director-General
National Environment Management Authority
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 28.]
CATEGORIES OF BIOMEDICAL WASTE
1. Infections waste Waste suspected to contain pathogens e.g.
laboratory cultures, waste from isolation wards,
tissues (swabs), materials, or equipment that have
been in contact with tubings, catheters, IGS
toxins, live or attenuated vaccines, soiled plaster
costs and other materials contaminated with blood
infected patients, excreta.
2. Pathological waste Human and animal tissues or fluids, e.g. body
parts blood and other body fluids, fetuses, animal
carcasses.

-- 213 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 214
SEVENTH SCHEDULE, FORM II—continued
3. Sharps Sharp waste, e.g. needles, infusion sets, scalpels,
knives, blades, broken glass that may cause
puncture and cuts. This includes both used and
unused sharps.
4. Pharmaceutical waste Waste containing pharmaceuticals, e.g.
pharmaceuticals that are expired or no longer
needed; items contaminated by or containing
pharmaceuticals (bottles, boxes).
5. Genotoxic Waste Waste containing substances with genotoxic
properties, e.g. waste containing cytostatic drug
(often used in cancer therapy), genotoxic
chemicals.
6. Chemical waste Waste containing chemical substances e.g.
laboratory reagents; film developer, disinfectants,
(disinfectants) that are expired or no longer
needed solvents.
7. Waste with high content of heavy
metals
Batteries, broken thermometers, blood-pressure
gauges, etc.
8. Pressurised containers Gas cylinders, gas cartridges, aerosol cans.
9. Radioactive waste Waste containing radioactive substances, e.g.
unused liquids from radiotherapy or laboratory
research, contaminated glassware, packages, or
absorbent paper, urine and excreta from patients
treated or tested with unsealed radionuclides,
sealed sources.
10. General solid waste Waste generated from offices, kitchens,
packaging material from stores.
11. Micro-organisms Any biological entity, cellular or non-cellular
capable of replication or of transferring genetic
material.
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 29.]
COLOUR CODE FOR BIOMEDICAL ADOPTED FROM THE WHO COLOUR CODE
PART I
Type of Waste Colour of Container and
Markings
Type of Container
1. Infectious Yellow Strong leak-proof plastic bag with
biohazard symbol
2. Pathological Yellow Strong leak-proof plastic bag with
biohazard symbol
3. Sharps Yellow-(marked sharps) Puncture proof
4. Chemical and
Pharmaceutical
Brown Plastic bag or container

-- 214 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
215 [Issue 1]
EIGHTH SCHEDULE—continued
5. Non-infectious/non
hazardous (Non-clinical)
Black Plastic bag or container
6. Radioactive waste Lead box, labelled with radioactive
symbol
7. Non-infectious/non
hazardous (Non-clinical)
Black Plastic bag or container
• Infectious, Pathological and Sharp waste should also be marked with the international
biohazard symbol.
• Chemical waste should also be marked with the appropriate international chemical hazard
symbol.
• Radioactive waste must be labelled with the appropriate warning symbol as in the Eighth
Schedule Eight Part II.
Note:
1. Colour coding of waste categories with multiple treatment options as defined in Schedule Nine,
shall be selected depending on treatment option chosen, which shall be as specified in the
Ninth Schedule.
2. Waste collection bags for waste types needing incineration shall not be made of chlorinated
plastics.
PART II – SYMBOLS
[Regulation 39.]
Class 5
(No. 5.1)
Division 5.1
Oxidizing substances
Symbol (flame over circle): black;
Background: yellow;
Figure ‘5.1’ in bottom corner.
(No. 5.2)
Division 5.2
Organic peroxides
Symbol (flame over circle): black;
Background: yellow;
Figure ‘5.2’ in bottom corner.
Class 6
(No. 6.1)
Division 6.1
Toxic substances
Symbol (skull and crossbones); black;
Background: white;
Figure ‘6’ in bottom corner.
(No. 6.2)
Division 6.2
Infectious substances
The lower half of the label may bear the inscription
‘INFECTIOUS SUBSTANCE’ and in the case of
damage or leakage immediately notify the Public
Health Authority:
Symbol (three crescents superimposed on a circle)
and inscriptions: black; Background: white; Figure ‘6’
in bottom corner.

-- 215 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 216
EIGHTH SCHEDULE—continued
Class 7 Radioactive material
(No. 7A)
Category I – White Symbol [trefoil]; black;
Background: white; Text (mandatory): black in lower
half of label;
‘RADIOACTIVE’
‘Contents .......... ‘
Activity .............. ‘
Figure ‘7’ in bottom corner.
(No. 7B)
Category II – Yellow Symbol [trefoil]; black;
Background: upperhalf yellow with white border, lower
half white; Text (mandatory): black in lower half of
label;
‘RADIOACTIVE’
‘Contents .......... ‘
Activity .............. ‘
In a black outlined box: ‘Transport index’; Two red
bars should follow the word ‘Radioactive’
Figure ‘7’ in bottom corner.
(No. 7C)
Category II – Yellow Symbol [trefoil]; black;
Background: upperhalf yellow with white border lower
half white; Text (mandatory): black in lower half of
label;
‘RADIOACTIVE’
‘Contents .......... ‘
‘Activity ............. ‘
In a black outlined box: ‘Transport index’ Three red
bars should follow the word ‘Radioactive’
Figure ‘7’ in bottom corner.
Class 8 [Corrosive] substances
(No. 8)
Category I – White Symbol (liquids, spilling from two
glass vessels and attacking a hand and a metal);
black background; upper half white, lower half black
with white border;
Figure ‘8’ in white in bottom corner.
Class 9 Miscellaneous dangerous substances and
articles
(No. 9)
Category I – White Symbol (seven vertical stripes in
upper half); black; Background: white, lower half black
with white border;
Figure ‘9’ underlined in bottom corner.

-- 216 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
217 [Issue 1]
NINTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 30.]
TREATMENT METHODS OF BIOMEDICAL WASTES
Waste category Treatment method
Contaminated animal carcasses Incineration
Cultures and stock Steam sterilization
Contaminated bedding/patient care waste Steam sterilization or incineration
Contaminated small equipment Steam sterilization or incineration
Contaminated large equipment Formaldehyde decontamination
Waste biological Steam sterilization or incineration
Surgery waste Steam sterilization or incineration
Human blood Steam sterilization or incineration
Autopsy waste Incineration
Human blood products Steam sterilization or incineration
Contaminated laboratory waste Steam sterilization
Pathological waste Steam sterilization or incineration/grinding
Dialysis unit waste Steam sterilization
Contaminated and unused sharps Steam sterilization and incineration/grinding
Pharmaceutical waste See separate pharmaceutical waste guidelines
Anti-neoplastic drug waste Incineration
Low level radioactive waste consult Radiation Protection Board
Note:
▪ Chemical treatment using at least 1% hypochlorite solution or any other equivalent chemical
reagent. It must be ensured that the chemical treatment.
▪ Mutilation/shredding must be such so as to prevent unauthorised reuse.
▪ There will be no chemical pre-treatment before incineration.
▪ Chlorinated plastics shall not be incinerated.
▪ Deep burial shall be an option available only in towns with population less than five hundred
thousand and in rural areas.
TENTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 35.]
STANDARDS FOR WASTE AUTOCLAVING
The autoclave should be indicated for the purposes of disinfecting and treating biomedical
waste.
I. When operating a gravity flow autoclave, medical waste shall be subjected to—
(i) a temperature of not less than 121ºC and pressure of 15 pounds per square
inch (psi) for an autoclave residence time of not less than 60 minutes; or

-- 217 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 218
(ii) a temperature of not less than 135ºC and a pressure of 31 psi for an
autoclave residence time of not less than 45 minutes; or
(iii) a temperature of not less than 149ºC and a pressure of 52 psi for an
autoclave residence time of not less than 30 minutes.
II. When operating a vacuum autoclave, medical waste shall be subjected to a
minimum of one pre-vacuum pulse to purge the autoclave of all air. The waste shall be
subjected to the following—
(i) a temperature of not less 121ºC and a pressure of 15 psi per autoclave
residence time of not less than 45 minutes; or
(ii) a temperature of not less than 135ºC and a pressure of 31 psi for an
autoclave residence time of not less than 30 minutes.
III. Medical waste shall not be considered properly treated unless the time
temperature and pressure indicators indicate that the required time, temperature and
pressure were reached during the autoclave process. If for any reasons, time temperature,
pressure or residence time was not reached, the entire load of medical waste must be
autoclaved again until proper temperature, pressure and residence time were achieved.
IV. Recording of operational parameters
Each autoclave shall have graphic or computer recording devices, which will
automatically and continuously monitor and record dates, time of the day, load
identification number and operating parameters throughout the entire length of the
autoclave cycle.
V. Validation test
Spore testing:
The autoclave should completely and consistently kill biological indicator at the
maximum design capacity of each autoclave unit. Biological indicator for autoclave shall
be Bacillus stearothermophilus spore using vials or spore strips, with at least 1 x 104
spores per millilitre. Under no circumstances will an autoclave have minimum operating
parameters less than a residence time of 30 minutes, regardless of temperature and
pressure, a temperature less than 121ºC or pressure less than 15 psi.
VI Routine Test
A chemical indicator strip/tape that changes colour when a certain temperature is
reached can be used to verify that a specific temperature has been achieved. It may be
necessary to use more than one strip over the waste package at different locations to
ensure that the inner content of the package has been adequately autoclaved.
STANDARDS FOR LIQUID WASTE
The effluent generated from the hospital should conform to the following limits—
Parameters Permissible limits
pH 6.5–9.8.5
Suspended solids 100 mg/l
Oil and grease Nil
BOD 30 mg/l
COD 50 mg/l
Bio-assay test 90% survival of fish after 96 hours in 100% effluent

-- 218 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
219 [Issue 1]
These limits are applicable to those hospitals, which are either connected with
sewers without terminal sewage treatment plant or not connected to sewage. For
discharge into public sewers with terminal facilities, the general standards as notified
under the Environmental Management Co-ordination (Water Quality) Regulations, 2005,
shall be applicable.
STANDARDS FOR MICROWAVING
1. Microwave treatment shall not be used for cytotoxic, hazardous or radioactive wastes,
contaminated animal carcasses, body parts and large metal items.
2. The microwave system shall comply with the efficacy test/routine tests and a
performance guarantee may be provided by the supplier before operation of the unit.
3. The microwave should completely and consistently kill the bacteria and other
pathogenic organisms that is ensured by approved biological indicator at the maximum
design capacity of each microwave unit. Biological indicators for microwave shall be
Bacillus subtilis spores using vials strips with at least 1 x 104 spores per millilitre.
STANDARDS FOR DEEP BURIAL
1. A pit trench should be dug about 2 metres deep. It should be filled with waste, and
then covered with lime within 50 cm of the surface, before filling the rest of the pit with soil.
2. It must be ensured that animals do not have any access to burial sites. Covers of
galvanized iron/wire meshes may be used.
3. On each occasion, when wastes are added to the pit, a layer of 10 cm of soil shall be
added to cover the wastes.
4. Burial must be performed under close and dedicated supervision.
5. The deep burial site should be relatively impermeable, and no shallow well should be
close to the site.
6. The pits should be distant from habitation, and sited so as to ensure that no
contamination occurs of any surface water or groundwater. The area should not be prone
to flooding or erosion.
7. The Authority will authorize the location of the deep burial site.
8. The institution shall maintain a record of all pits for deep burial.

-- 219 of 302 --

-- 220 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
221 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION
(FOSSIL FUEL EMISSION CONTROL) REGULATIONS, 2006
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Emission inspection.
4. Emission standards.
5. Environmental inspectors.
6. Power of inspectors.
7. Approval of catalyst.
8. Fuel catalyst.
9. Application for approval of fuel catalyst.
10. Licensing of persons to treat fuel.
11. Partnership with Authority.
12. Cost of clearing pollution.
13. Fees.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE – PETROL POWERED MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSION
STANDARDS
SECOND SCHEDULE – FORMS

-- 221 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 222
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION
(FOSSIL FUEL EMISSION CONTROL) REGULATIONS, 2007
[L.N. 131/2006.]
1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental Management and Co-ordination
(Fossil Fuel Emission Control) Regulations, 2006 and shall come into operation on
1st February, 2007.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“air pollution control methods” means the mechanisms and technologies aimed
at emission control or methods or processes that can be used separately or together to
reduce emissions and improve air quality standards;
“air pollution” means the introduction by man, directly or indirectly, of substances
in the air which results in harmful effects of such nature as to endanger human health,
harm living resources and eco-systems, cause material damage, interfere with
amenities and other legitimate uses of the environment;
“emissions inspection” means the determination of the level of emissions from a
motor vehicle, plant or industry;
“fossil fuels” means petrol, diesel fuel oils and kerosene;
“fossil fuels emissions” means emissions causing air pollution from the use of
any fossil fuel where the constituent properties are not properly combusted in an
internal combustion engine and are emitted out as toxic carbon gases and particulates
matter;
“fuel catalyst” means a liquid supplement added to refined fossil fuels for use in
internal combustion engines to act in a manner that speeds up the fuel burning
process, causes a more complete combustion of fuel by optimizing the molecular
combustion process to significantly improve fuel economy as well as reduce harmful
toxic emissions without altering the quality of fuel and is completely safe to use with no
harm or damage to the environment, human health and the internal combustion
engines;
“internal combustion engine” means any engine that is mobile (as in a vehicle)
or stationary (as in a generator) that uses fossil fuels in order to derive their required
energy and will emit the same properties and levels of pollution given its choice of fuel
and application;
“polluter” means an individual or organization causing, or operating a source of,
air pollution.
3. Emission inspection
(1) The Authority—
(a) shall administer a system for emissions inspection of all internal combustion
engines within Kenya; and
(b) may require every internal combustion engine to be inspected at least once
annually.

-- 222 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
223 [Issue 1]
(2) The Authority may liaise with lead agencies dealing with internal combustion
engine inspection and may delegate the responsibility of undertaking emission inspection
to such agencies, and any power exercised by any such lead agencies as regards
emission inspection will be deemed to have been exercised under these Regulations.
4. Emission standards
(1) Any internal combustion engine is subject to inspection under these Regulations
and shall, as a condition of compliance with the inspection, pass such tests as may be
required to demonstrate that the internal combustion engine complies with any standards
and requirements for the control of air pollution or contamination as may be prescribed.
(2) The emission standards to be complied with by any internal combustion engine
shall be those set out in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(3) Any person who operates or owns an internal combustion engine and permits it to
be operated upon any road, street, public highway or any premises, which emits smoke or
other air contaminants in excess of emission standards set out in the First Schedule
commits an offence and shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty prescribed in
section 144 of the Act.
5. Environmental inspectors
The Authority may appoint such number of environmental inspectors as it may deem
appropriate for purposes of carrying out emissions inspection under these Regulations
and may, without prejudice to the foregoing, appoint any employee of a lead agency
conducting inspection of internal combustion engines on behalf of the Government.
6. Power of inspectors
An environmental inspector shall, in the discharge of his functions under these
Regulations, have such powers as are conferred on an inspector under sections 117 and
118 of the Act.
7. Approval of catalyst
(1) The Authority may approve any substance to be used as a fuel catalyst if, in the
opinion of the Authority, the substance improves fuel economy, enhances combustion and
reduces harmful emissions that adversely affect human, animal and plant health and
degrade the environment.
(2) The Minister shall publish in the Gazette, on the recommendation of the Authority,
any substance that has been approved as a fuel catalyst under these Regulations.
8. Fuel catalyst
(1) For the better control of toxic emissions, no internal combustion engine shall use
any fuel other than fuel that has been treated using a fuel catalyst approved by the
Authority.
(2) A person who knowingly offers for sale any fuel that has not been treated using an
approved fuel catalyst commits an offence and shall be liable upon conviction, in addition
to the penalty prescribed in section 144 of the Act, to confiscation of the fuel.
9. Application for approval of fuel catalyst
A person seeking approval of a substance as a fuel catalyst shall apply to the Authority
in the prescribed Form 1 set out in the Second Schedule, and the application shall be
accompanied by—
(a) the prescribed fee;
(b) details of the manufacturer of the substance;

-- 223 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 224
(c) manufacturer’s authorisation in case of an application by an agent;
(d) chemical composition of the substance; and
(e) empirical evidence supporting use and effects of the substance on the
environment.
10. Licensing of persons to treat fuel
(1) The Authority may issue a licence in the prescribed Form II set out in the Second
Schedule to a person to sell or treat fuel through the addition of an approved fuel catalyst
and may impose such conditions as it may deem appropriate.
(2) A person who offers for sale any fuel catalyst without a licence issued by the
Authority commits an offence and shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty
prescribed in section 144 of the Act.
11. Partnership with Authority
(1) The Authority may enter into a partnership arrangement with any person designed
to provide—
(a) a facility for internal combustion engine emission inspection; or
(b) services to fuel marketers, vendors or producers for treatment of fuel by
supplementing an approved fuel catalyst;
(c) capacity building on air quality management with emission reduction
methods, technologies and with real-time ambient air quality monitoring
networking capacity.
(2) The Authority may enter into any partnership arrangement aimed at enhancing
control of fossil fuel emissions and to this end, may train environmental inspectors, set up
or license private emissions inspection workshops.
12. Cost of clearing pollution
The direct cost of clearing pollution through fuel emission shall be borne by the
polluter.
13. Fees
The fees payable for the application for approval of a substance as a fuel catalyst
under these Regulations shall be ten thousand shillings.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Rule 4(2).]
A. – PETROL POWERED MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSION STANDARDS
Vehicle Class and Model Year Maximum
Emission
Concentration HP
(ppm)
CO (percentage)
Class I:
Gross vehicle weight of 6000 pounds or less
1975-1977 500 5.0
1978-1979 400 4.0

-- 224 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
225 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
Vehicle Class and Model Year Maximum
Emission
Concentration HP
(ppm)
CO (percentage)
1980 300 3.0
1981 + 220 1.2
Class II:
Gross vehicle weight of 6001 pounds to 10,000 pounds
1975-1977 750 6.5
1978-1979 600 5.5
1980 400 4.5
1981-1984 300 3.0
1985 + 220 1.2
B. – DIESEL POWERED MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSION STANDARDS
Standards and Procedures for Inspection of Diesel Fuelled Vehicles – Pass/Fail
Criteria
1. Dynamometer Conditions—
(a) A diesel-powered vehicle with a net weight greater than or equal to 6001
pounds and less than or equal to 10,000 pounds shall be tested on a loaded
dynamometer by applying a single load of 30Hp (+ 2Hp) while being operated
at a drive wheel speed of 50 mph (+2mph).
(b) A diesel-powered vehicle with a net weight of 6000 pounds or less shall be
tested on a loaded dynamometer by applying a single load of 9Hp (+2Hp)
while being operated at a drive wheel speed of 30mph (+2mph).
2. Opacity Standard
No diesel-powered vehicle shall emit visible emissions in excess of 20% opacity for 5
consecutive seconds or more when under the applicable loading—
(a) All diesel-powered motor vehicles shall be inspected with an opacity meter
that meets the requirements of the Authority.
(b) Separate measurements shall be made on each exhaust outlet on diesel-
powered motor vehicles equipped with multiple exhaust outlets. For vehicles
equipped with more than one exhaust pipe, the reading taken from the outlet
giving the highest opacity reading shall be used for comparison with the
standard. Exhaust tail pipes on diesel-powered motor vehicles shall allow for
safe attachment of the opacity meter sensor unit. Dual or multiple exhaust
motor vehicles will be tested by sampling all exhaust tail pipes simultaneously
or individually.
(c) Any diesel-powered motor vehicle not meeting the opacity standard shall fail
the inspection.
3. Idle Mode Test
When it is necessary to omit the loaded mode test, as specified below, an opacity
measurement shall be made while the vehicle is operating at idle under no load—
(a) If the opacity measured during the idle mode test is greater than 5%, the
vehicle shall fail the inspection.

-- 225 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 226
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
(b) The loaded mode test shall be omitted on any motor vehicle if—
(i) the motor vehicle is in any condition that precludes loaded mode
testing for reasons of health or safety, or both, or personnel, facility,
equipment or vehicle;
(ii) the motor vehicle is unable to be tested because of the vehicle’s
inability to attain the speeds specified on the dynamometer;
(iii) the motor vehicle is equipped with a constant four-wheel drive.
(c) Re-inspection stations shall not be allowed to perform the idle mode test for
diesel-fuelled vehicles.
4. Inspection Rejection
The emissions inspector may refuse to perform the opacity test required by these
Regulations for any motor vehicle if the motor vehicle has an obvious exhaust system leak
or other condition that could affect the validity of the opacity reading, as determined by the
emissions inspector.
SECOND SCHEDULE
FORMS
FORM I (NEMA/FC/1) (Regulation 7)
Application Reference No. .......
Applicable Fee: KSh. 10,000
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE FOR FUEL CATALYST TO SUPPLEMENT THE SPECIFIED
FOSSIL FUELS
Name of Applicant ................................................................................................................................
Person Authorized to Act on behalf of Applicant (Name and Title) ......................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Contact pezson (Name and Title) .........................................................................................................
National Identification Card/Passport No. .............................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal Address (Business) ..................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Company Name ....................................................................................................................................
Physical Address ..................................................................................................................................
Postal Address .....................................................................................................................................
Main Business Activity ..........................................................................................................................
Tel./Fax/E-mail contacts .......................................................................................................................
Kenyan Business Registration Certificate No. ......................................................................................
PIN Number ........................................................................ hereby applies for approved fuel catalyst
Type of Fuel Catalyst Scientific Formula of Fuel
Catalyst
Kenya Bureau of Standards KS’
Number
1. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
2. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
3. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
4. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
5. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
6. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................

-- 226 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
227 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE, FORM I—continued
I declare that the information provided in this application is correct and accurate and that the
applicant makes this application in support of a request for approval by NEMA of a fuel catalyst to
be supplemented to the specified fossil fuels and in compliance with the provisions of these
Regulations.
Dated ................................................................................................................................. 20 .............
Name .................................................................. Signature ...............................................................
Witness..................................................................................................................................................
Address .................................................................................................................................................
Occupation ...........................................................................................................................................
FORM II (NEMA/FC2) (Regulation 7)
LICENCE FOR APPROVED FUEL CATALYST
Licence No. FF/FC ...............................................................................................................................
Name ....................................................................................................................................................
Address ................................................................................................................................................
The Authority has evaluated your application Ref. No. .................................................. and a licence
hereby issued for use of the following fuel catalyst:
Type of Fuel Catalyst Scientific Formula of Fuel
Catalyst
Kenya Bureau of Standards
‘KS’ Number
1. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
2. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
3. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
4. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
5. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
6. ........................................... .................................................. ...................................................
for use in specified fossil fuels and is granted subject to the following conditions:
CONDITIONS OF LICENCE
1. This Licence will be valid for the project period of..........................................from the date hereof.
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
4. ........................................................................................................................................................
5. ........................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................
Director General
National Environment Management Authority
(Signature and official stamp)

-- 227 of 302 --

-- 228 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
229 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION (CONSERVATION OF
BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY AND RESOURCES, ACCESS TO GENETIC
RESOURCES AND BENEFIT SHARING) REGULATIONS, 2006
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Application.
PART II – CONSERVATION OF BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
4. Environmental Impact Assessment Licence.
5. Conservation of threatened species.
6. Inventory of biological diversity.
7. Monitoring of status.
8. Protection of environmentally significant areas.
PART III – ACCESS TO GENETIC RESOURCES
9. Access permit.
10. Notification of application.
11. Determination of application.
12. Form of access permit.
13. Communication of decision.
14 Validity and renewal of access permit.
15. Terms, conditions of an access permit, etc.
16. Suspension, cancellation, etc., of access permit.
17. Register of access permits.
18. Material Transfer Agreement.
PART IV – BENEFIT SHARING
19. Application of this Part.
20. Benefits sharing.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS
21. Confidentiality.
22. Transition.
23. Offences.
24. Penalties.
SCHEDULE
FIRST SCHEDULE – FORM OF APPLICATION OF AN ACCESS PERMIT
SECOND SCHEDULE – FEES
THIRD SCHEDULE – FORM OF ACCESS PERMIT

-- 229 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 230
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION (CONSERVATION OF
BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY AND RESOURCES, ACCESS TO GENETIC
RESOURCES AND BENEFIT SHARING) REGULATIONS, 2006
[L.N. 160/2006.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental Management and Co-ordination
(Conservation of Biological Diversity and Resources, Access to Genetic Resources and
Benefit Sharing) Regulations, 2006.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“access” means obtaining, possessing and using genetic resources conserved,
whether derived products and, where applicable, intangible components, for purposes
of research, bio-prospecting, conservation, industrial application or commercial use;
“access permit” means a permit that allows a person to access genetic resources
issued under regulation 4;
“benefit sharing” means the sharing of benefits that accrue from the utilization of
genetic resources;
“endangered species” means any species which is in danger of extinction
throughout all or a significant portion of its range (due to man-made or natural changes
in the environment);
“genetic material” means any genetic material of plant, animal, microbial or other
origin containing functional units of heredity;
“habitat” means the place or type of site where an organism or population
naturally occurs and includes areas colonized by introduced organisms;
“holotype” means the single specimen chosen for designation of a new species;
“intangible components” means any information held by persons that is
associated with or regarding genetic resources within the jurisdiction of Kenya;
“inventory” means a detailed list, report or record of resources, or the process of
making such a list, report or record;
“Material Transfer Agreement” means an agreement negotiated between the
holder of an access permit and a relevant lead agency or community on access to
genetic resources and benefit sharing;
“natural environment system” means relatively intact ecosystems of unique
value, such as perennial and seasonal wetlands, highly diverse aquatic ecosystems, or
ecosystems promoting a high concentration of rare and unusual species;
“Prior Informed Consent” means an international operation procedure for
exchanging, receiving and handling notification and information by a competent
authority; and
“threatened species” means any species of plant or animal which is likely to
become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or
significant portion of its range.

-- 230 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
231 [Issue 1]
3. Application
These Regulations shall not apply to—
(a) the exchange of genetic resources, their derivative products, or the
intangible components associated with them, carried out by members of any
local Kenyan community amongst themselves and for their own
consumption;
(b) access to genetic resources derived from plant breeders in accordance with
the Seeds and Plant Varieties Act (Cap. 326);
(c) human genetic resources; and
(d) approved research activities intended for educational purposes within
recognized Kenyan academic and research institutions, which are governed
by relevant intellectual property laws.
PART II – CONSERVATION OF BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
4. Environmental Impact Assessment Licence
(1) A person shall not engage in any activity that may—
(a) have an adverse impact on any ecosystem;
(b) lead to the introduction of any exotic species;
(c) lead to unsustainable use of natural resources,
without an Environmental Impact Assessment Licence issued by the Authority under the
Act.
(2) In this Regulation. “exotic species” means any species of plant or animal or
microorganism (life form) whose natural range does not, or did not in the past, exist in a
specific part of, or the whole of Kenya and which out-competes all other life forms.
5. Conservation of threatened species
(1) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, impose bans,
restrictions or similar measures on the access and use of any threatened species in order
to ensure its regeneration and maximum sustainable yield.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Authority shall, in
consultation with the relevant lead agencies—
(a) issue licenses for the establishment and maintenance of facilities for the
recovery and rehabilitation of threatened species;
(b) determine full recovery and rehabilitation measures of threatened species to
ensure its restoration into its natural habitat.
6. Inventory of biological diversity
(1) Within twenty-four months from commencement of these Regulations, the
Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, identify and prepare an
inventory of biological diversity of Kenya.
(2) The inventory shall include threatened, endangered, or rare species.
(3) The inventory shall be maintained and updated every year thereafter by the
Authority.
(4) The inventory shall be a public record of the Authority and shall be accessible, in a
prescribed manner, to any person on application to the Authority, and upon payment of
such fees as may be prescribed by the Authority.

-- 231 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 232
7. Monitoring of status
The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, monitor the status
and the components of biological diversity in Kenya and take necessary measures to
prevent and control their depletion.
8. Protection of environmentally significant areas
This Part shall apply to any area of land, sea, lake or river which the Minister has, by
notice in the Gazette, declared to be a protected natural environment system for purposes
of promoting and preserving biological diversity in accordance with section 54 of the Act.
PART III – ACCESS TO GENETIC RESOURCES
9. Access permit
(1) Any person who intends to access genetic resources in Kenya shall apply to the
Authority for an access permit in the form set out in the First Schedule, and such
application shall be accompanied by the fees prescribed in the Second Schedule to these
Regulations.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by evidence of Prior Informed Consent from
interested persons and relevant lead agencies, and a research clearance certificate from
the National Council for Science and Technology.
10. Notification of application
The Authority shall, upon receipt of the application, give notice thereof by publication in
the Gazette and at least one newspaper with nationwide circulation, or in such other
manner as the Authority may consider appropriate, specifying—
(a) the name and other particulars of the applicant;
(b) the activity to be undertaken for which the access permit is required; and
(c) the time within which representations or objections in respect of the
proposed access permit may be made to the Authority.
11. Determination of application
(1) The Authority shall, on receipt of representations or objections to the proposed
access permit from the public, review the application and if satisfied that the activity to be
carried out shall facilitate the sustainable management and utilization of genetic resources
for the benefit of the people of Kenya, issue an access permit to the applicant.
(2) Where the Authority has reasonable grounds for refusing to issue an access
permit, it shall inform the applicant of the reasons of such refusal in writing.
(3) A person aggrieved by refusal of the Authority to grant a licence may appeal to the
Tribunal in accordance with section 129 of the Act.
12. Form of access permit
The Form set out in the Third Schedule is prescribed as the form of access permit.
13. Communication of decision
The Authority shall, within sixty days of receipt of an application for an access permit,
determine the application and communicate its decision in writing to the applicant.
14. Validity and renewal of access permit
(1) An access permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue and
shall not be transferable.

-- 232 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
233 [Issue 1]
(2) Upon expiry, an access permit may be renewed for a further period of one year
upon payment of the fee prescribed in the Second Schedule and upon such terms and
conditions as the Authority may deem necessary to impose.
15. Terms, conditions of an access permit, etc.
(1) An access permit shall contain such terms and conditions as the Authority may
deem necessary to impose.
(2) In addition to such terms and conditions as may be contained in an access permit,
the following conditions shall be implied in every access permit—
(a) duplicates and holotypes of all genetic resources collected shall be
deposited with the relevant lead agency;
(b) records of all intangible components of plant genetic material collected shall
be deposited with the Authority;
(c) reasonable access to all genetic resources collected shall be guaranteed to
all Kenyan citizens whether such genetic resources and intangible
components are held locally or abroad;
(d) all agreements entered into with respect to access of genetic resources
shall be strictly for the purposes for which they were entered into;
(e) the furnishing of quarterly reports to the Authority on the status of research,
including all discoveries from research involving genetic resources and/or
intangible components thereof;
(f) the holder of an access permit shall inform the Authority of all discoveries
made during the exercise of the right of access granted under the access
permit;
(g) the holder of an access permit shall provide the following reports—
(i) a semi-annual status report on the environmental impacts of any
ongoing collection of genetic resources or intangible components
thereof;
(ii) a final status report on the environmental impacts of collection of
genetic resources or intangible components thereof, in the event that
the collection is of a duration of three months or less;
(h) the holder of an access permit shall abide by the laws of the country.
(3) The Authority may, on its own volition or on the application by an access permit
holder, vary the conditions of an access permit.
16. Suspension, cancellation, etc., of access permit
(1) The Authority may suspend, cancel or revoke any access permit issued under
these Regulations where the holder thereof is in contravention of any of the conditions
imposed on the access permit or those implied under these Regulations, or of the
agreements concluded pursuant to its grant.
(2) The Authority shall, before suspending, cancelling or revoking an access permit,
give a written notice of its intention to suspend, cancel or revoke the permit to the holder
thereof, and shall accordingly invite the holder to make representations within thirty days
from the date of such notice.
(3) Where the Authority suspends, cancels or revokes a permit, it shall publish the
order suspending, cancelling or revoking the permit in the Gazette and in at least one
newspaper with nationwide circulation.
(4) The provisions of regulation 11(3) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the suspension,
cancellation or revocation of an access permit.

-- 233 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 234
17. Register of access permits
The Authority shall keep, manage and update as appropriate a register of all access
permits which it has granted, and the register shall be a public record of the Authority and
shall be accessible, in a prescribed manner, to any person on application to the Authority,
and upon payment of the fees prescribed in the Second Schedule.
18. Material Transfer Agreement
Notwithstanding any provisions contained in these Regulations, no person shall
transfer any genetic resources outside Kenya unless such person has executed a Material
Transfer Agreement.
PART IV – BENEFIT SHARING
19. Application of this Part
This Part shall apply subject to the laws in force relating to intellectual property rights.
20. Benefit sharing
(1) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the holder of an access permit
shall facilitate an active involvement of Kenyan citizens and institutions in the execution of
the activities under the permit.
(2) The facilitation by the holder of an access permit shall include enjoyment of both
monetary and non-monetary benefits arising from the right of access granted and the use
of genetic resources.
(3) Monetary benefits include—
(a) access fees or fee per sample collected or acquired;
(b) up-front payments;
(c) milestone payments;
(d) payment of royalties;
(e) licence fees in case genetic resources are to be utilised for commercial
purposes;
(f) fees to be paid to trust funds supporting conservation and sustainable use
of biodiversity;
(g) salaries and preferential terms where mutually agreed;
(h) research funding;
(i) joint ventures;
(j) joint ownership of relevant intellectual property rights.
(4) Non-monetary benefits include—
(a) sharing of research and development results;
(b) collaboration, co-operation and contribution in scientific research and
development programmes, particularly biotechnological research activities;
(c) participation in product development;
(d) admittance to ex situ facilities of genetic resources and to databases by
participating institutions;
(e) transfer to Kenya of genetic resources of knowledge and technology under
fair and most favourable terms, including concessional and preferential
terms where agreed, in particular, knowledge and technology that make use
of genetic resources, including biotechnology, or that are relevant to the
conservation and sustainable utilization of biological diversity;

-- 234 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
235 [Issue 1]
(f) strengthening capacities for technology transfer to Kenya;
(g) institutional capacity building;
(h) human and material resources to strengthen the capacities for the
administration and enforcement of access regulations;
(i) training related to genetic resources with the full participation of Kenya and
where possible, in Kenya;
(j) access to scientific information relevant to conservation and sustainable use
of biological diversity, including biological inventories and taxanomic
studies;
(k) institutional and professional relationships that can arise from access and
benefit sharing agreements and subsequent collaborative activities;
(l) joint ownership of relevant intellectual property rights.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS
21. Confidentiality
(1) On the request of an applicant of an access permit, the Authority may hold some
information relating to access to genetic resources the subject of the application as
confidential.
(2) Where an access permit is granted, information held as confidential under
paragraph (1), with respect to the relevant applicant, shall not be accessible to a person
inspecting the register of access permits in accordance with regulation 17.
22. Transition
A person carrying out any activities involving access to genetic resources immediately
before the coming into force of these Regulations shall, within six months from the coming
into force thereof, take all necessary measures to ensure full compliance with these
Regulations.
23. Offences
A contravention or failure to comply with any of the matters provided in these
Regulations shall constitute an offence.
24. Penalties
Any person convicted of an offence under these Regulations shall be liable to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months, or to a fine not exceeding three
hundred and fifty thousand shillings, or both.
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Regulation 9.]
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR AN ACCESS PERMIT
Applicants applying as individuals should fill Part I.
Applicants applying as corporates (organisations) should fill Part II.
All applicants must fill Part III.
All applicants must submit ten (10) hard copies and one (1) soft copy of this application to the
Authority.

-- 235 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 236
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
PART I – FOR APPLICANTS WHO ARE INDIVIDUALS
(a) Name of applicant ..........................................................................................................................
(b) Identification Card No./Passport No. ..............................................................................................
(c) Postal Address ...............................................................................................................................
(d) PIN No. ...........................................................................................................................................
(e) Permanent Residential Address .....................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
(f) Qualifications (Curriculum Vitae to be attached) ............................................................................
PART II – FOR APPLICANTS WHO ARE CORPORATE (ORGANIZATIONS)
(a) Name of Organization ....................................................................................................................
(b) Permanent Address .......................................................................................................................
(c) Registered Address ........................................................................................................................
(d) Registration No. (Attach copy of certificate of registration) ............................................................
(e) Qualification of individuals in the project (Curriculum Vitae to be attached) ..................................
........................................................................................................................................................
(f) Details (if any) of—
(i) holding and subsidiary institutions; or
(ii) individuals connected to the project .....................................................................................
(g) Name of the contact person in regard to this application and the position held in the organization
........................................................................................................................................................
PART III – FOR ALL APPLICANTS
1.0 Financial Details
Sources:
(i) The total budget of the project ......................................................................................
(ii) Details of any corporate or individual sponsors of the project ......................................
......................................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................................
2.0 Technical Particulars
(a) What are the details of your previous collection/research (if any) conducted in any of the
East African countries (Kenya, Uganda and/or Tanzania)?
(b) With regard to genetic resources for which access is sought, the following must be
provided:
(i) scientific names of taxa;
(ii) specific sites in which access will be undertaken;
(iii) possible location;
(iv) parts of the genetic resource to be collected (tissues, cells, seeds, leaves, microbes,
etc.);
(v) derivatives and/or products;
(vi) quantities to be collected;
(vii) any known uses of the genetic resources;
(viii) in case of genetic resources held ex situ, details of the relevant depository
institution(s).
(c) With regard to the planned collecting mission, the following must be provided:
(i) identification of the provider(s) of the genetic resources for which access is sought;
(ii) collection methods to be used;
(iii) if there are Kenyan nationals or institutions to be used, their particulars;

-- 236 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
237 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
(iv) expected date of commencement and completion of the activity;
(v) information regarding immigration status in Kenya of foreign individuals that will visit
Kenya.
(d) Proposed use of genetic resources:
(i) form of use to which the genetic resources will be put;
(ii) expected research results;
(iii) geographical location in which each element of the research programme will take
place.
(e) Details of any royalties, payments and/or other compensation that the applicant offers for
access to genetic resources.
(f) Will the applicant require assistance to identify and access the genetic resources described
in this application? If yes, give details of the assistance that will be required.
(g) A copy of the Prior Informed Consent document signed by the relevant lead agencies, local
community or private owner of the genetic resources.
(h) A copy of research clearance document from the National Council of Science and
Technology.
(i) Any other information in the possession of the applicant which might be useful for the
National Environment Management Authority to make an informed decision in granting an
access permit.
3.0 Renewal Details
Is this an application for renewal of an access permit?
YES ............................................................ NO ............................................................................
Access Permit No. ........................................ Granted on ............................................... (Date)
All applicants are forewarned that it is an offence to give false information to the National
Environment Management Authority punishable under the Environmental Management and Co-
ordination (Conservation of Biological Diversity and Resources, Access to Genetic Resources
and Benefit Sharing) Regulations, 2006.
I undertake to provide progress and full reports as required under the Regulations.
I declare that to the best of my knowledge the information given in respect of this application is
true.
For individual applicants:
Name of Applicant ..........................................................................................................................
Signature ........................................................................................................................................
Date ................................................................................................................................................
For Companies/Institutions—
(Affix company seal)
In the presence of—
Name of Director ............................................................................................................................
Signature ........................................................................................................................................
Name of Director/Company Secretary ...........................................................................................
Signature ........................................................................................................................................
Date ................................................................................................................................................

-- 237 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 238
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Regulations 9, 14(2), 17.]
FEES
KSh.
(a) To apply for an access permit—
(i) Individual applicants ...................................................................................... 20,000.00
(ii) Corporate applicants ..................................................................................... 50,000.00
(b) To renew an access permit—
(i) Individual applicants ...................................................................................... 10,000.00
(ii) Corporate applicants ..................................................................................... 25,000.00
(c) To peruse the register of access permits—
(i) Residents ...................................................................................................... 1,000.00
(ii) Non-residents ................................................................................................ 5,000.00
THIRD SCHEDULE
[Regulation 12.]
FORM OF ACCESS PERMIT
This permit is hereby granted to Mr./s. .................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
............................................................. (insert name, contact address and description of applicant) in
accordance with regulation 11 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Conservation
of Biological Diversity and Resources, Access to Genetic Resources and Benefit Sharing)
Regulations, 2006 for the collection of the following genetic resources:
...............................................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................................................... (insert
description of the genetic resource, its derivative product(s) or intangible component(s) as stated in
the Materials Transfer Agreement) located at ......................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
........................................... (insert geographical description of the location of the genetic resources).
This permit is issued subject to the Regulations and all agreements concluded pursuant to its grant,
and may be suspended, cancelled or revoked should the holder breach any of those agreements
and the conditions of issue and those contained in the Regulations.
M/S. .................................................................................................. (insert name of applicant) being
the holder of this permit, including his agents and assignees, undertake to abide by the conditions of
this permit and to promptly report to the National Environment Management Authority any matter
that may prejudice the interests of Kenya and other parties concluded pursuant to the grant of this
permit.
Signed: ............................................................... Date: ...................................................................
Director General,
National Environment Management Authority

-- 238 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
239 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION
(CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES) REGULATIONS, 2007
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – CLASSIFICATION AND CONTROL MEASURES
3. Classification of controlled substances.
4. Packaging of controlled substances.
5. Labelling of controlled substances.
6. Storage, distribution, transportation or handling a controlled substance.
7. Disposal of controlled substance.
8. Advertisement of controlled substances.
PART III – LICENSING AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
9. Manufacturing of controlled substances.
10. Application for export.
11. Importation of controlled substances.
12. Application for controlled substances in transit.
13. Application for permit to import or export different quantities.
14. Acknowledgement of application.
15. Communication of decision and issue of licence.
16. Validity and renewal of licence.
17. Condition of licence.
18. Licence not transferable.
19. Revocation or suspension of licence.
20. Variation of licence.
21. Maintenance of a register.
22. Exemptions.
23. Illegal procurement.
PART IV – MONITORING PROVISIONS
24. Role of the Authority.
25. Obligation of licensee.
26. Submission of report by licensee.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
27. Publication of controlled substances and of persons holding permits.
28. General penalty for offences.
29. Public access to records.
30. Transitional provision.

-- 239 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 240
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE – CLASSIFICATION OF SUBSTANCES
SECOND SCHEDULE – FORMS
THIRD SCHEDULE – FORMS
FOURTH SCHEDULE – DECLARATION BY THE RECIPIENT/BUYER OF
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
FIFTH SCHEDULE – REPORT ON THE IMPORTATION/EXPORTATION
OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
SIXTH SCHEDULE – FEES

-- 240 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
241 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION (CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES) REGULATIONS, 2007
[L.N. 73/2007.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental Management and Co-ordination
(Controlled Substances) Regulations, 2007.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“competent authority” means a competent authority on matters relating to
controlled substances designated by an importing country;
“consumption” means production including imports excluding exports of
controlled substances;
“controlled substances” means the controlled substances as set out in the First
Schedule to these Regulations;
“material data safety sheet” includes written instructions given by a manufacturer
on how to store, transport or handle controlled substances;
“Ozone Secretariat” means the Secretariat for the 1985 Vienna Convention on
the Protection of the Ozone Layer and the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that
Deplete the Ozone Layer;
“Prior Informed Consent” means such consent as may be given by the
competent Authority before the importation or exportation of a controlled substance;
“production” means amount of controlled substances produced minus the
amount destroyed by approved technologies and minus the amount entirely used as
feedstock in the manufacture of other chemicals and does not include recycled and
reused amounts;
“Secretariat to the Multilateral Fund” means the Secretariat for the Multilateral
Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol as established in 1990.
PART II – CLASSIFICATION AND CONTROL MEASURES
3. Classification of controlled substances
(1) The Authority, shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agency, prepare and
submit to the Minister for approval, a list of controlled substances.
(2) The list to be prepared under this Regulation shall be divided into three groups as
follows—
(a) group 1 of the list shall consist of partially halogenated flourochemicals with
ozone depleting substances of less than 0.12 and defined as transitional
substances;
(b) group 2 of the list shall consist of hydrobromoflourocarbons with ozone
depleting substances estimated to vary from 0.1 to 1.00; and
(c) group 3 of the list shall consist of bromochloromethane with ozone depleting
substances.

-- 241 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 242
(3) The Minister may, on the advice of the Authority, in consultation with the relevant
lead agency, ban or restrict the production or consumption of specified controlled
substances by order in the Gazette.
4. Packaging of controlled substances
No person shall keep, sell or consign for transport a controlled substance unless—
(a) the controlled substance is in a container impervious to the controlled
substance; and
(b) the container is sufficiently strong to prevent leakage arising from the
ordinary risks of handling and transport.
5. Labelling of controlled substances
(1) No controlled substance shall be supplied without a label on the container.
(2) Every label on a controlled substance container shall show—
(a) the name of the controlled substance or product;
(b) the name and address of the manufacturer of the controlled substance or
product;
(c) the name of the country of origin of the controlled substance or product;
(d) the words “Controlled Substance – Not ozone friendly”;
(e) a symbol indicating that the substance or product is harmful to the ozone
layer;
(f) the name of the seller and address of the premises on which it is sold if
supplied on sale, other than wholesale; and
(g) the name and address of the supplier if supplied otherwise than on sale.
6. Storage, distribution, transportation or handling a controlled substance
(1) No person shall store, distribute, transport or otherwise handle a controlled
substance unless the controlled substance is accompanied by the material safety data
sheet.
(2) Any person producing or importing a controlled substance shall at the time of
production, packaging or importation, ensure that the material safety data sheet
accompanies the produced, packaged or imported controlled substance.
7. Disposal of controlled substance
(1) Any person wishing to dispose of a controlled substance shall inform the Authority
which shall ensure that the controlled substance is disposed of in an environmentally
sound manner.
(2) The Authority shall liaise with the Ozone Secretariat in matters relating to the
disposal of a controlled substance.
8. Advertisement of controlled substances
Any person who advertises any controlled substances shall ensure that the
advertisement carries the words— “Warning: contains chemicals, materials or substances
that deplete or have potential to deplete the stratospheric ozone layer”.

-- 242 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
243 [Issue 1]
PART III – LICENSING AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
9. Manufacturing of controlled substances
(1) No person shall manufacture for sale a controlled substance unless the person
has a valid licence issued by the Authority.
(2) An application for a licence to produce or manufacture a controlled substance shall
be made to the Authority in the prescribed Form 1 set out in the Second Schedule to these
Regulations and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(3) Upon the application for a licence under this Regulation, the Authority may grant
the licence unconditionally, impose conditions on the licence or refuse to grant the licence.
(4) The licence under this Regulation shall be in the prescribed Form 6 set out in the
Second Schedule.
10. Application for export
(1) No person shall export a controlled substance unless such person has a valid
licence issued by the Authority.
(2) An application to export a controlled substance shall be made to the Authority in
the prescribed Form 4 set out in the Second Schedule to these Regulations and shall be
accompanied by—
(a) a Prior Informed Consent issued by the competent Authority of the importing
country; and
(b) the prescribed fee.
11. Importation of controlled substances
(1) No person shall import into Kenya a controlled substance unless such person has
a valid licence issued by the Authority.
(2) The application shall be in the prescribed form and the applicant shall indicate the
purpose for which the controlled substance is required.
(3) An application to import a controlled substance shall be made to the Authority in
the prescribed Form 2 set out in the Second Schedule to these Regulations and shall be
accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(4) Upon the application for a licence under this Regulation, the Authority may grant
the licence unconditionally, impose conditions on the licence or refuse to grant the licence.
(5) A licence under this Regulation shall be in the prescribed Form.
(6) A person issued with an import licence shall keep a full and accurate record of
such importation.
12. Application for controlled substances in transit
(1) Any person transporting through Kenya any controlled substance, that is not
destined for use in Kenya shall—
(a) apply for approval to transport such controlled substance through Kenya;
and
(b) ensure that the controlled substance is properly packaged and transported
in accordance with these Regulations and international standards.

-- 243 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 244
(2) An application for approval to transport through Kenya a controlled substance shall
be made to the Authority in the prescribed Form 3 as set out in the Second Schedule to
these Regulations and shall be accompanied by—
(a) a copy of the Prior Informed Consent issued by the competent Authority of
the importing country; and
(b) the prescribed deposit bond which shall be refundable.
13. Application for permit to import or export different quantities
(1) Where a person licensed to import or export any controlled substance wishes to
import or export the controlled substance in different quantities and at different times, the
person shall make an application for a permit for every importation or exportation that is to
be made.
(2) An application for a permit to import or export a controlled substance in different
quantities shall be in Form 5 in the Second Schedule to these Regulations and shall be
accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(3) Any person issued with a permit to import or export a controlled substance shall
submit a copy of the permit to the custom officials at the port of entry or exit.
(4) The customs official at the port of entry or exit shall verify that the controlled
substance permitted to be imported or exported is in accordance with the conditions set
out in the licence and permit.
14. Acknowledgement of application
(1) Upon the receipt of any application under these Regulations, the Authority shall
screen the application for completeness and shall acknowledge receipt of the application
within fourteen days.
(2) Where the application is not complete, the Authority shall inform the applicant and
shall request the applicant to furnish the Authority with additional information.
(3) Where the application is for the importation of a controlled substance, the Authority
shall prepare the Prior Informed Consent and submit the same to the competent authority
of the exporting country.
(4) The Authority shall liaise with the relevant lead agencies in determining the
application and where the Authority is satisfied that the applicant meets the requirements
set out, the Authority shall approve the application.
(5) Where the application does not meet the requirements set out, the Authority shall
reject the application.
(6) A permit to import or export a controlled substance shall be in the prescribed Form
7 set out in the Second Schedule.
15. Communication of decision and issue of licence
The Authority shall communicate its decision to the applicant, in writing, within forty-
five days (45) of receipt of the application and shall state the reasons for such decision
where the application has been rejected.
16. Validity and renewal of licence
A licence issued under these Regulations, shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issue and may be renewed on application.

-- 244 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
245 [Issue 1]
17. Condition of licence
The Authority may impose any conditions upon the licence it deems necessary for the
compliance with these Regulations.
18. Licence not transferable
A licence issued under these Regulations shall relate only to the specific activity for
which it was issued and shall not be transferable.
19. Revocation or suspension of licence
The Authority may suspend or revoke a licence where the licensee has contravened
any of the conditions set out in the licence or any provisions of these Regulations.
20. Variation of licence
The Authority may vary a licence or the conditions of the licence either upon the
application of the licensee or on its own motion where new information is available to the
Authority or to the licensee and the Authority is of the opinion that the information may
affect the conditions imposed on the licence.
21. Maintenance of a register
(1) The Authority shall establish and maintain a register in the manner prescribed in
the Third Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) The register shall contain—
(a) information on every application received;
(b) information on every decision document;
(c) information on every licence issued;
(d) a record of controlled substances imported, exported, disposed of or in use
in the country;
(e) a record of quantities of controlled substances imported, exported, disposed
of or in use in the country;
(f) a record of returns made by licensees; and
(g) any other information that the Authority may deem necessary to preserve.
22. Exemptions
The Minister may on the advice of the Authority, in consultation with the relevant lead
agencies order in the Gazette that a controlled substance for essential use be exempt
from the provisions of these Regulations.
23. Illegal procurement
(1) Where an imported controlled substance does not meet the specifications of the
licensed controlled substance, the Authority shall require the licensee to—
(a) return the controlled substance to the country of origin at the cost of the
licensee; or
(b) pay for the cost of disposal of the controlled substance by the Authority.
(2) The Authority shall revoke the licence of any person in contravention of a licence
under subsection (1).

-- 245 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 246
PART IV – MONITORING PROVISIONS
24. Role of the Authority
(1) The Authority shall in consultation with the relevant lead agencies, monitor the
activities of the licensees to—
(a) determine effects of the controlled substances on human health and
environment; and
(b) to ensure that the licensees comply with the provisions of these
Regulations.
(2) In carrying out its monitoring role the Authority shall be responsible for—
(a) disposal of controlled substances;
(b) periodic reporting to the Ozone Secretariat and the Multilateral Fund
Secretariat on the produced, imported, exported or consumed controlled
substances;
(c) receiving returns from licensees;
(d) processing and forwarding Prior Informed Consent to the Competent
Authority of the countries of importation;
(e) receiving Prior Informed Consent from the Competent Authority of the
country of exportation or liaising with the competent Authority of the country
of exportation to verify the Prior Informed Consent; and
(f) any other matters that the Authority may deem necessary for the effective
implementation of these Regulations.
25. Obligation of licensee
(1) Any licensee who imports or produces any controlled substances shall ensure that
all persons who receive or buy such substances sign a declaration prescribed in the
Fourth Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) Any licensee who supplies, sells or distributes any controlled substances shall
keep a record of the declaration forms and submit the record to the licensing Authority
after every six months.
26. Submission of reports by licensee
(1) Every person licensed under these Regulations shall make and submit reports
containing information relating to the licence, activities undertaken under the licence and
conditions imposed under the licence to the Authority after every six months or whenever
the Authority may demand.
(2) The report shall be in the prescribed form set out in the Fifth Schedule to these
Regulations.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
27. Publication of controlled substances and of persons holding permits
(1) The Authority shall on or before 31st December of every year, publish a list of
controlled substances in the Kenya Gazette. This list shall consist of—
(a) controlled substances that were imported in the year, together with their
quantities;
(b) controlled substances that were exported in the year and their quantities;
(c) quantities of all controlled substances that were imported or exported in the
year;

-- 246 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
247 [Issue 1]
(d) all persons holding licences to import and export controlled substances and
their annual permitted allocations of the controlled substances.
28. General penalty for offences
(1) Any person who contravenes any provision of these Regulations commits an
offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding three hundred and fifty thousand
shillings or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eighteen months or to both such fine
and imprisonment.
(2) In addition to any sentence that the Court may impose on a person convicted
under subsection (1), the Court may direct that the person pays the full cost of disposal of
the controlled substance by the Authority.
29. Public access to records
Any person may on application to the Authority and upon payment of the prescribed
fee have access to any records submitted to the Authority under these Regulations.
30. Transitional provision
Any person who is producing, importing, exporting or transporting through Kenya a
controlled substance shall within two months of the commencement of these Regulations,
comply with the provisions of these Regulations.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Regulation 4.]
CLASSIFICATION OF SUBSTANCES
ITEM COLUMN I COLUMN II COLUMN III
Controlled Substances Ozone Depleting
Potential (ODP)
ANNEX A GROUP I
CFC-11 Tricholoroflouromethane 1.0
CFC-12 Dichlorodiflouromethane 1.0
CFC-113 1, 1,2-Trichloro-1, 2, 2-trifluoroethane 0.8
CFC-114 1, 2-Dichlorotetrafluoroethane 1.0
CFC-115 Chloropentafluoroethane 0.6
GROUP II
Halon 1211 Bromochlorodifluoromethane 3.0
Halon 1301 Bromotriflouromethane 10.0
Halon 2402 Dibromotetrafluoroethane 6.0
ANNEX B CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CFC-13 Chlorotrifluoromethane 1.0
CFC-111 Pentachlorofluoroethane 1.0

-- 247 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 248
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
ITEM COLUMN I COLUMN II COLUMN III
Controlled Substances Ozone Depleting
Potential (ODP)
CFC-112 Tetrachlorodifluoroethane 1.0
CFC-211 Heptachlorofluoropropane 1.0
CFC-212 Hexachloridefluoropropane 1.0
CFC-213 Pentachlorotrifluoropropane 1.0
CFC-214 Tetrachlorotetraflouropropane 1.0
CFC-215 Trichloropentafluoropropane 1.0
CFC-216 Dichlorohexaflouropropane 1.0
CFC-217 Chloroheptafluoropropane 1.0
GROUP II
CCI4 Carbon Tetrachloride (Tetracloromethane) 1.1
GROUP III
C 2 H 3Cl3 Methyl Chloroform (1, 1, 1-Trichloroethane) 0.1
ANNEX C:
GROUP I
Partially halogenated fluorochemicals (40 compounds including HCFC-21, HCFC-22, HCFC-123,
HCFC-124, HCFC-141b, HCFC-142) all with ODPs of less than 0.12, are defined as transitional
substances.
Group I Controlled Substance Number of Isomers Ozone Depleting
Potential (ODP)
CHF 2Cl HCFC-22** 1 0.055
CH 2 FCl HCFC-31 1 0.02
C 2 HFCl4 HCFC-121 2 0.01-0.04
C 2 HF2 Cl3 HCFC-122 3 0.02-0.08
C 2 HF3 Cl3 HCFC-123 3 0.02-0.06
CHCL2CF3 HCFC-123** – 0.02
C 2 HF4 Cl HCFC-124 2 0.02-0.04
CHFCLCF 3 HCFC-124** – 0.022
C 2 H 2FCl3 HCFC-131 3 0.007-0.05
C 2 H 2F2 Cl2 HCFC-132 4 0.008-0.05
C 2 H 2F3 Cl HCFC-133 3 0.02-0.06
C 2 H 3FC 2 HCFC-141 3 0.005-0.07
CH 3CF2Cl HCFC-141b** – 0.11

-- 248 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
249 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
Group I Controlled Substance Number of Isomers Ozone Depleting
Potential (ODP)
C 2 H 3F2 Cl HCFC-142 3 0.008-0.07
CH 3CF2Cl HCFC-142b** – 0.065
C 2 H 4FCl HCFC-151 2 0.003-0.005
C 3 HFCl6 HCFC-221 5 0.015-0.07
C 3 HF2 Cl5 HCFC-222 9 0.01-0.09
C 3 HF3 Cl4 HCFC-223 12 0.01-0.08
C 3 HF4 Cl3 HCFC-224 12 0.01-0.09
C 3 HF5 Cl2 HCFC-225 9 0.02-0.07
CF3 CF2CHCl2 HCFC-225ca** – 0.025
CF2 CICF2 CHClF HCFC-cb-225 – 0.033
C 3 HF6 Cl HCFC-226 5 0.02-0.10
C 3 H 2FCl5 HCFC-231 9 0.05-0.09
C 3 H 2F2 Cl4 HCFC-232 16 0.008-0.10
C 3 H 2F3 Cl3 HCFC-233 18 0.007-0.23
C 3 H 2F4 Cl12 HCFC-234 16 0.01-0.28
C 3 H 2F5 Cl HCFC-235 9 0.03-0.52
C 3 H 3FCl4 HCFC-241 12 0.004-0.09
C 3 H 3F2 Cl3 HCFC-242 18 0.005-0.13
C 3 H 3F3 Cl2 HCFC-243 18 0.007-0.12
C 3 H 3F4 Cl HCFC-244 12 0.009-0.14
C 3 H 4FCl3 HCFC-251 12 0.001-0.01
C 2 H 4F2 Cl2 HCFC-252 16 0.005-0.04
C 3 H 4F3 Cl HCFC-253 12 0.003-0.03
C 3 H 5FCl2 HCFC-261 9 0.002-0.02
C 3 H 5F2 Cl HCFC-262 9 0.002-0.02
C 3 H 6FCl HCFC-271 5 0.001-0.03
GROUP II
Hydrobromofluorocarbons (34 compounds with ODPs estimated to vary from around 0.1 up to 1.00)
Group II Controlled Substance Number of Isomers Ozone Depleting
Potential (ODP)
CHFBr2 1 1.00
CHF 2 Br (HBFC-22B1) 1 0.74
CH 2 FBr 1 0.73
C 2 HF2 Br4 2 0.3-0.8

-- 249 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 250
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
Group II Controlled Substance Number of Isomers Ozone Depleting
Potential (ODP)
C 2 HF2 Br3 3 0.5-1.8
C 2 HF3 Br2 3 0.4-1.6
C 2 HF4 Br 2 0.7-1.2
C 2 H 2FBr3 3 0.1-1.1
C 2 H 2F2 Br 2 4 0.2-1.5
C 2 H 2F3 Br 3 0.7-1.6
C 2 H 3FBr2 3 0.1-1.7
C 2 H 3F2 Br 3 0.2-1.1
C 2 H 4FBr 2 0.07-0.1
C 3 HFBr 6 5 0.3-1.5
C 3 HF2 Br5 9 0.2-1.9
C 3 HF3 Br4 12 0.3-1.8
C 3 HF4 Br3 12 0.5-2.2
C 3 HF5 Br2 9 0.9-2.0
C 3 HF6 Br 5 0.7-3.3
C 3 H 2FBr5 9 0.1-1.9
C 3 H 2F2 Br 4 16 0.2-2.1
C 3 H 2F3 Br 3 18 0.2-5.6
C 3 H 2F4 Br 2 16 0.3-7.5
C 3 H 2F5 Br 8 0.9-14.0
C 3 H 3FBr4 12 0.08-1.9
C 3 H 3F2 Br 3 18 0.1-3.1
C 3 H 3F3 Br 2 18 0.1-2.5
C 3 H 3F4 Br 12 0.3-4.4
C 3 H 4FBr3 12 0.03-0.3
C 3 H 4F2 Br 2 16 0.1-1.0
C 3 H 4F3 Br 12 0.07-0.8
C 3 H 5FBr2 9 0.04-0.4
C 3 H 5F2 Br 9 0.07-0.8
C 3 H 6FBr 5 0.02-0.7
GROUP III
CH 2 BrCI bromochloromethane 0.12
* Where a range of ODPs is indicated, the highest value in that range shall be used for the
purposes of these Regulations. The ODPs listed as a single value have been determined from
calculations based on laboratory measurements. Those listed as a range are based on estimates

-- 250 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
251 [Issue 1]
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
and are less certain. The range pertains to an isomeric group. The upper value is the estimate of
the ODP of the isomer with the highest ODP, and the lower value is the estimate of the ODP of
the isomer with the lowest ODP.
** Identifies the most commercially viable substances with ODP values listed against them to be
used for the purposes of these Regulations.
ANNEX D*
PRODUCTS** CONTAINING CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Products**
1. Automobile and truck air conditioning units (whether incorporated in vehicles or not).
2. Domestic and commercial refrigeration and air conditioning/heat pump equipment***
e.g. refrigerators;
freezers;
dehumidifiers;
water coolers;
ice machines;
air conditioning and heat pump units.
3. Aerosol products, except medical aerosols.
4. Portable fire extinguisher.
5. Insulation boards, panels and pipe covers.
6. Pre-polymers.
* This Annex was adopted by the Third Meeting of the Parties in Nairobi, 21st June 1991 as
required by paragraph 3 of Article 4 of the Protocol.
** Though not when transported in consignments of personal or household effects or in similar non-
commercial situations normally exempted from customs attention.
*** When containing controlled substances in Annex A as a refrigerant and/or in insulating material
of the product.
ANNEX E
Group Controlled Substance Ozone Depleting Potential
Group I
CH 3 Br Methyl bromide 0.6
SECOND SCHEDULE
FORM I (Regulation 9(2))
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
Application Reference No.
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO PRODUCE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Name of Applicant .................................................................................................................................
Person Authorized to act on behalf of Applicant: (name and title) ........................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................

-- 251 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 252
SECOND SCHEDULE , FORM I —continued
Contact Person: (Name and Title) ........................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
National Identification Card/Passport No. .............................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal Address: (Business) .................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal Address: (Residential) .............................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Company Name.....................................................................................................................................
Physical Address ...................................................................................................................................
Postal Address .....................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Main Business Activity ..........................................................................................................................
Tel./Fax/E-mail contacts .......................................................................................................................
Registration Certificate No. ...................................................................................................................
PIN number ..........................................................................................................................................
hereby applies for a licence to produce the following types of controlled substances.
Type of Controlled Substances Quantity to be Produced (kgs.)
1. ...................................................................... .............................................................................
2. ...................................................................... .............................................................................
3. ...................................................................... .............................................................................
4. ...................................................................... .............................................................................
5. ...................................................................... .............................................................................
I declare that the information provided in this application is correct and accurate, and that the
applicant undertakes to produce the controlled substance in compliance with the provisions of these
Regulations.
Date ................................................................................................................................... 20 .............
Name .................................................................. Signature ............................................................
Witness .................................................................................................................................................
Address ................................................................................................................................................
Occupation ...........................................................................................................................................
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Date received .......................................................................................................................................
Amount paid .........................................................................................................................................
Receipt No. ...........................................................................................................................................
Signature ..............................................................................................................................................
Official stamp ........................................................................................................................................
Accepted/Rejected
Reason(s) for rejection .........................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................

-- 252 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
253 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
Complaint against decision should be addressed to the Tribunal and submitted not later than ..........
...............................................................................................................................................................
Date ....................................................................
.............................................................................
(Name and Signature of duly authorized officer)
FORM II (Regulation 11(3))
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
Application Reference No.
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO IMPORT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Name of Applicant ................................................................................................................................
Person Authorised to act on behalf of applicant: (Name and Title) ......................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Contact Person: (Name and Title) ........................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
National Identification Card/Passport No. .............................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal address: (Business) .................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal Address: (Residential) .............................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Company Name ....................................................................................................................................
Physical Address ..................................................................................................................................
Postal Address .....................................................................................................................................
Main Business Activity ..........................................................................................................................
Tel./Fax/E-mail contacts .......................................................................................................................
Registration Certificate No. ...................................................................................................................
PIN ........................................................................................................................................................
hereby applies for a licence to import the following controlled substances.
Type of Controlled
Substances
Quantity to be
Produced (kgs.)
Country of Origin Name and Address
of Licensee






I declare that the information provided in this application is correct and accurate, and that the
applicant undertakes to import the controlled substance in compliance with the provisions of these
Regulations.
Date ................................................................................................................................... 20 .............
Name .................................................................. Signature ............................................................

-- 253 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 254
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
Witness .................................................................................................................................................
Address ................................................................................................................................................
Occupation ...........................................................................................................................................
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Date Received ......................................................................................................................................
Amount Paid .........................................................................................................................................
Receipt No. ...........................................................................................................................................
Prior Informed Consent (PIC) Issued: Yes/No
PIC Number ..........................................................................................................................................
Date of Issue ........................................................................................................................................
Signature: .............................................................................................................................................
Official Stamp .......................................................................................................................................
Accepted/Rejected
Reason(s) for rejection:
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
FORM III (Regulation 12(2))
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
Application Form No
APPLICATION TO TRANSPORT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES THROUGH KENYA
1. Exporter Registration No. ...............................................................................................................
Name ..............................................................................................................................................
Address ..........................................................................................................................................
Contact Person ..............................................................................................................................
Telephone .............................................................. Fax ...............................................................
E-mail .............................................................................................................................................
2. Importer Registration No. ...............................................................................................................
Name ..............................................................................................................................................
Address ..........................................................................................................................................
Contact Person ..............................................................................................................................
Telephone .............................................................. Fax ...............................................................
E-mail .............................................................................................................................................
3. Classification and qualities of controlled substances to be transported
Class Quantities in kgs./litres





-- 254 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
255 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE , FORM III—continued
Class Quantities in kgs./litres





4. Intended Period of Time for Transport ...........................................................................................
Expected entry Date .......................................................................................................................
Expected Exit Date..........................................................................................................................
5. Description of Packaging Type(s)
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
6. Intended carrier(s) Registration No. ...............................................................................................
Name ..............................................................................................................................................
Address ..........................................................................................................................................
Contact Person ..............................................................................................................................
Telephone .............................................................. Fax ...............................................................
Means of Transport ........................................................................................................................
7. Written Prior Informed Consent (PIC) from Relevant Competent Authority of Country of Import
Has consent been given? YES_ NO_
If YES, attach a copy of the PIC
I/We .................................................................................. hereby confirm that the above information
and particulars is true and correct.
Signature and stamp ............................................................................................................................
Date: ...................................................................
FORM IV (Regulation 10(2))
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
Application Reference No
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO EXPORT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Name of Applicant: ...............................................................................................................................
Person Authorised to act on behalf of Applicant (Name and Title) .......................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Contact person (Name and Title) .........................................................................................................
National Identification Card/Passport No. .............................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal Address (Business) ..................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal address (Residential) ...............................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Company Name ....................................................................................................................................
Physical Address ..................................................................................................................................

-- 255 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 256
SECOND SCHEDULE, FORM IV—continued
Postal address ......................................................................................................................................
Main Business Activity ..........................................................................................................................
Tel./Fax/E-mail contacts .......................................................................................................................
Registration Certificate No. ...................................................................................................................
PIN ........................................................................................................................................................
hereby applies for a licence to export the following types of controlled substances.
Type of Controlled
Substances
Quantity (kgs.) Country of Export Name and Address of
Importer









I declare that the information provided in this application is correct and accurate, and that the
applicant undertakes to export the controlled substance in compliance with the provisions of these
Regulations
Date ................................................................................................................................... 20 .............
Name .................................................................. Signature ............................................................
Witness .................................................................................................................................................
Address ................................................................................................................................................
Occupation ...........................................................................................................................................
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Prior Informed Consent Received: YES/NO
Date Received ......................................................................................................................................
PIN: .......................................................................................................................................................
Amount Paid .........................................................................................................................................
Receipt No. ...........................................................................................................................................
Signature ..............................................................................................................................................
Official Stamp .......................................................................................................................................
Accepted/Rejected
Reason(s) for rejection:
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................

-- 256 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
257 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
FORM V (Regulation 13(2))
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
Application Ref. No
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO IMPORT/EXPORT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Name of Applicant ................................................................................................................................
Licence number .................................................. Control period .........................................................
Quantity licensed to be Imported/Exported ..........................................................................................
Person authorized to act on behalf of Applicant: (Name and Title) ......................................................
Contact person: (Name and title)...........................................................................................................
National Identification Card/Passport Number .....................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal Address: (Residential) .............................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Company Name ....................................................................................................................................
Physical Address ..................................................................................................................................
Postal Address .....................................................................................................................................
Main Business Activity ..........................................................................................................................
Telephone/Fax/E-mail contacts ............................................................................................................
Registration Certificate Number ...........................................................................................................
Personal Identification Number (PIN) ...................................................................................................
hereby applies for a permit to import/export the following controlled substances—
Class/type of
Controlled
Substance
Trade
name
Quantity (kg) to be
imported/exported
Balance of
quantity to be
imported/exported
Country of
origin/destination
Name and
address of
importer/
exporter
I declare that the information provided in this application is correct and accurate, and that the
applicant undertakes to import/export the controlled substance in compliance with the provisions of
these Regulations.
Date ................................................................................................................................... 20 .............
Name .................................................................. Signature ............................................................
Witness .................................................................................................................................................
Address ................................................................................................................................................
Occupation ...........................................................................................................................................

-- 257 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 258
SECOND SCHEDULE , FORM V—continued
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Date Received ......................................................................................................................................
Amount Paid .........................................................................................................................................
Receipt No. ...........................................................................................................................................
Signature ......................................................
Official Stamp .......................................................................................................................................
Accepted/Rejected ................................................................................................................................
Reason(s) for rejection .........................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
FORM VI (Regulation 9(4))
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
LICENCE TO PRODUCE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
............................................................................................................... is hereby licensed to produce
the following controlled substance(s) for the period running from ........................................................
............................................. to ............................................................................................................
List of controlled substances:
Type of Controlled Substances Quantity to be Produced (Kgs)
Conditions attached to this licence:
1. ........................................................................................................................................................
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
Date: ...................................................................
.............................................................................
Director General
National Environment Management Authority
...............................................................................
SEAL

-- 258 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
259 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE—continued
FORM VII (Regulation 14(6))
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
PERMIT TO IMPORT/EXPORT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
........................................................................................................................... is hereby permitted to
import/export the following shipment of controlled substance(s):
Licence
No.
Type of
controlled
substance
Trade
name
Approved/
licenced
quantity
(Kgs)
Quantity
previously
imported/
exported
Quantity
to be
imported/
exported
Balance
of
quantity
to be
imported/
exported
Country of
origin/
destination
Name
and
address
of
importer/
exporter
Conditions attached to this Permit:
1. ........................................................................................................................................................
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
4. ........................................................................................................................................................
5. ........................................................................................................................................................
Date ....................................................................
.............................................................................
Director General
National Environment Management Authority
...............................................................................
SEAL

-- 259 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 260
THIRD SCHEDULE
Form A
 
(Regulation 21)
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
REGISTER OF LICENCE APPLICATIONS RECEIVED
Name of
	Applicant
Application
No.
Date
Received
Type/ Class of
Controlled
Substance to be
Imported/
	Exported
Trade
	Name
Activity to be
Licensed
Import/Export
Quantity to be
Imported/
Exported (Kgs)
Contact
	Address
of
Importer/
	Exporter
Country of
Origin/
Destination
Decision of
NEMA

-- 260 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
261 [Issue 1]
THIRD SCHEDULE—
continued
FORM B
 
(Regulation 21)
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
REGISTER OF LICENCES ISSUED
Licence No.
 
Name of
	Licence
Date of
	Issue
Type/class of
Controlled
Substance to be
	Imported/Exported
Trade
	Name
Activity licensed
	Import/Export
Quantity to be
Imported/Exporte
d (Kgs)
Contact
	Address
of
licensee
Country of
Origin/
Destination
Conditions
	attached to
	the licensee

-- 261 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 262
THIRD SCHEDULE—
continued
FORM C
 
(Regulation 21)
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
REGISTER OF PERMITS ISSUED
Permit
No.
Licence
No.
Name of
	Person
Issued with
	the Permit
Date of
	Issue
Type/Class of
Controlled
Substance to be
	Imported/Exported
Trade
	Name
Activity Permitted,
Import/Export
Quantity to be
Imported/
Exported (Kgs)
Contact
	Address
of
Licensee
Country of
Origin/Destinatio
n
Conditions
	Attached
to the
	Permit

-- 262 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
263 [Issue 1]
THIRD SCHEDULE—
continued
FORM D
 
(Regulation 21)
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
REGISTER OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES IMPORTED, EXPORTED OR DISPOSED AND THEIR QUANTITIES
Type/Class of
Controlled
Substance to be
Imported/
	Exported/
	Disposed
Trade Name
 
Date of
Importation/
	Exportation/
Disposal
Quantity to be
Imported/ Exported/
Disposed (kgs)
Country of
Origin/
Destination/
Disposal
Contact Address of
	Importer/Exporter or
Disposer
Quantity of the
Controlled Substance
	in use in the country
(Kgs)
NEMA
	Remarks

-- 263 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 264
THIRD SCHEDULE—
continued
Form E
 
(Regulation 22)
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
REGISTER OF RETURNS MADE BY LICENSEES
Name of
	Licensee
Contact
	Address
of
Licensee
Licence
No.
Type/Class of
Controlled
Substance to be
Imported/ Exported
Trade Name
 
Actual
	Date of
	Import/
	Export
Quantity
	Imported/
Exported (Kgs)
Ozone
Depleting
	Potential
	(ODP)
Calculated level
	of Import/ Export
	Quantity of the
Controlled
Substance in
use in the
	country
Date of
	control
Name and
	Address of
	Recipients of
	the Controlled
	Substance(s)

-- 264 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
265 [Issue 1]
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 25(1).]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
Declaration No.
DECLARATION BY THE RECIPIENT/BUYER OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE(S)
Information Concerning the Vendor/Supplier:
Name of Vendor/Supplier .....................................................................................................................
PIN Number ............................................................. Telephone .........................................................
Licence Number ...................................................................................................................................
Address ................................................................................................................................................
Information Concerning the Buyer/Recipient
Contact Person (Name and Title) .........................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
National Identification Card/Passport Number ......................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal Address: (Residential) .............................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Company Name ....................................................................................................................................
Physical Address ..................................................................................................................................
Postal Address .....................................................................................................................................
Main Business Activity ..........................................................................................................................
Telephone/Fax/E-mail Contacts ...........................................................................................................
Registration Certificate Number ...........................................................................................................
PIN ........................................................................................................................................................
Type of controlled
substance
Quantity (Kgs.) Trade Name Purpose
I undertake not to sell or otherwise supply any of the quantity of the controlled substances received
to any person who has not signed a declaration in this format.
I also undertake to use all of the controlled substances received for the purpose set out in the
declaration but not for any other purpose.
I declare that the information provided in this declaration is correct to the best of my knowledge and
belief.
Designation ......................................................... Signature ............................................................
Company ............................................................ Address ..............................................................
Occupation ...........................................................................................................................................
Witness ............................................................... Signature ............................................................
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Date Received ......................................................................................................................................
Amount Paid .........................................................................................................................................

-- 265 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 266
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
Receipt No. ...........................................................................................................................................
Licence No. ...........................................................................................................................................
Signature ..............................................................................................................................................
Official Stamp .......................................................................................................................................
FIFTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 26(2).]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
REPORT ON THE IMPORTATION/EXPORTATION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Name of Licensee .................................................................................................................................
Application Number ..............................................................................................................................
Licence Number.....................................................................................................................................
Name of Licensing Officer ....................................................................................................................
Contact Person (Name and Title) .........................................................................................................
National Identification Card/Passport Number .....................................................................................
Contact Person’s Physical and Postal Address ....................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Company Name ....................................................................................................................................
Physical Address ..................................................................................................................................
Postal Address ......................................................................................................................................
Main business Activity ...........................................................................................................................
Telephone/Fax/E-mail Contacts ...........................................................................................................
Registration Certificate Number ............................................................................................................
Personal Identification Number .............................................................................................................
............................................................................................................ . hereby submits a report on the
importation/exportation of the following controlled substances
Class/
type of
Controlled
Substance
Trade
name
Quantity
(kg)
licenced to
be
imported/
exported
Date of
import/
export
Quantity
imported/
exported
Balance to
be
imported/
exported
Country of
origin/
destination
Name and
address of
importer/
exporter
Use(s) of the controlled substance imported/exported:
(a) ........................................................................................................................................................
(b) ........................................................................................................................................................
(c) ........................................................................................................................................................
(d) ........................................................................................................................................................

-- 266 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
267 [Issue 1]
FIFTH SCHEDULE—continued
Date of clearance: .................................................................................................................................
I declare that the information provided in this report is correct and accurate to the best of my
knowledge and belief.
.............................................. .............................................. ...............................................
Date Name Signature
Designation ...........................................................................................................................................
Company ..............................................................................................................................................
Address .................................................................................................................................................
Occupation ............................................................................................................................................
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Date Received ......................................................................................................................................
Amount Paid .........................................................................................................................................
Receipt Number ....................................................................................................................................
Signature ..............................................................................................................................................
Official Stamp .......................................................................................................................................
SIXTH SCHEDULE
[Regulations 9(2), 10(2), 11(3), 12(2)(b), 13(2), 30]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
[Act No. 8 of 1999.]
FEES
The fees chargeable under these Regulations shall be as specified hereunder and shall be non-
refundable except as indicated.
(a) Application for a licence to produce controlled substances ................................. KSh. 15,000
(b) Application for a licence to import a controlled substance ................................... KSh. 15,000
(c) Deposit bond – 15% of Cost, Insurance and Freight value (CIF) (Refundable)
(d) Application to export a controlled substance ........................................................ KSh. 7,500
(e) Application for a permit to export or import a controlled substance ..................... KShs. 1,500
(f) Inspection of records ............................................................................................ KShs. 200

-- 267 of 302 --

-- 268 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
269 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION (WETLANDS, RIVER
BANKS, LAKE SHORES AND SEA SHORE MANAGEMENT) REGULATIONS, 2009
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – MANAGEMENT OF WETLANDS AND WETLAND RESOURCES
3. Application of Part.
4. Objectives of Part.
5. General Principles.
6. The Standards Enforcement Review Committee.
7. The District Environment Committee.
8. Protected Wetlands.
9. Procedure for Declaration of Protected Wetlands.
10. Inventory of Wetlands.
11. Permitted use of Wetlands.
12. Wetland Resource Use Permit.
13. Temporary Permit.
14. Duty of Land Owners, Users and Occupiers.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF RIVER BANKS, LAKE SHORES AND SEA SHORE
15. Application of Part.
16. Objectives of Part.
17. General Principles.
18. Identification and Inventory of Degraded River banks, Lake shores and Sea shores
and Conservation measures.
19. Resource Use Permit.
20. Duty of District Environment Committee.
PART IV – MISCELLANEOUS
21. Requirement for Environment Impact Assessment.
22. Environmental Restoration Orders.
23. Duty of Environment Officer.
24. Sanitation.
25. Transition.
26. Improvement Notice.
27. Offences and Penalties.
28. Appeals.
29. Delegation of Powers and Functions.
30. Operation of Regulations.
SCHEDULE – REGULATED ACTIVITIES PERMITTED WITHIN PROTECTED
WETLANDS

-- 269 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 270
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION (WETLANDS, RIVER
BANKS, LAKE SHORES AND SEA SHORE MANAGEMENT) REGULATIONS, 2009
[L.N. 19/2009.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental Management and Co-ordination
(Wetlands, River Banks, Lake Shores and Sea Shore Management) Regulation, 2009.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“agriculture” means all farming activities including cultivation, agroforestry, bee
keeping, livestock management and aquaculture;
“alien species” means any exotic non-indigenous life forms originating from
outside a given ecological location, accidentally or deliberately introduced to the
location by human activity or by natural means;
“beach” means a geological landform of loose particles often composed of rock,
sand, gravel, shingle, pebbles or cobble, found at the landward margin of a lake or
coast line, the lower limits approximating to the position of the highest and lowest tidal
water levels;
“beach front” means a strip of land facing or running along a beach;
“Board” means the Board of Management of the Authority established under
section 10 of the Act;
“community” means community of people living in a defined geographical area
and identified by common history, common culture or common residence in an area,
and may comprise of representative members of the organized institutions in the
private sector or members of the civil society;
“conservation” means the care and management of a resource so that the
resource maintains its ability to fulfill its functions and provide goods and services for
present and future generations;
“District Environment Committee” means the District environment committee
appointed under section 29 of the Act;
“drainage of wetlands” means the removal or exclusion of water from a wetland
by pumping, excavation of channels, planting of fast growing non-wetland trees or
plants, abstraction of water from a river entering a wetland, channeling, or reclamation,
“Director-General” includes, for the purposes of these Regulations, a person
authorized by the Director General to act on his behalf;
“high water mark” means the historical recorded point of the highest level of
contact between the water and the shore or bank, as the case may be;

-- 270 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
271 [Issue 1]
“hunting” includes the doing of an act immediately directed at killing, wounding,
injuring or capture of any animal and the taking or willful interference with any nest, lair
or other place where a dependent young animal is born, hatched, or reared;
“inspector” means an inspector designated as an environmental inspector under
section 117 of the Act;
“interested parties” includes the community the lead agency, the Provincial
Environment Committee, the District Environment Committee and the Local
Environment Committee, and any other party having a discernible interest or a
concern;
“lake” means a body of fresh or salt water of considerable size, completely
surrounded by land, or a natural body or pool of water;
“Lake shore” means the rising ground from the highest normal water mark,
bordering or adjacent to a lake in the from of rock, mud, gravel or sand;
“lead agency” means any Government ministry, department, state corporation or
local authority in which any law vests functions of control or management of any
element of the environment or natural resource;
“livestock” includes cattle, horses, donkeys, mules, pigs, sheep, goats, camels
and all other domesticated animals;
“low water mark” means the historical recorded point of the lowest level of
contact between the water and the shore or the bank as the case may be;
“management plan” means a management plan for a wetland, riverbank,
lakeshore or seashore, prepared under regulation 9;
“Minister” means the Minister for the time being responsible for matters relating to
the environment;
“modification” means any man-made change in the natural state of a wetland,
riverbank or lake shore;
“natural resources” include resources of the land, air, water, animals and plants
including their aesthetic qualities;
“occupier” means a person in possession or control of any land in which there is
a wetland, riverbank, lakeshore, sea shore or beach front;
“polluter pays principle” means that the cost of cleaning up any element of the
environment damaged by pollution, compensating victims of pollution, cost of
beneficial uses lost as a result of an act of pollution and other costs that are connected
with or incidental to the foregoing, is to be paid or borne by the person convicted of
pollution under this Act or any other applicable law;
“pre-cautionary principle” is the principle that where there are threats of damage
to the environment, whether serious or irreversible, lack of full scientific certainty shall
not be used as a reason for postponing cost effective measures to prevent
environmental degradation;
“protected species” means any plant or animal species declared as endangered or
threatened species under the Wildlife (Conservation and Management) Act (Cap. 376);
“endangered species” means any species which is in danger of extinction
throughout all or a significant portion of its range due to man-made or natural changes
in the environment or as may be declared by the relevant national authority;

-- 271 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 272
“threatened species” means any species of plant or animal is likely to become an
endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout or in a significant portion
of its range or as may be declared by the relevant national authority;
“protected wetlands” means an area declared as a protected wetland under
these Regulations or any other written law;
“Provincial Environment Committee” means the Provincial Environment
Committee appointed under section 29 of the Act;
“restoration” means regeneration or putting back a wetland, riverbank or lake
shore or sea shore to the state it was in or near to what it was before it was modified;
“river bank” means the rising ground from the highest normal water mark,
bordering or adjacent to a river in the form of rock, mud, gravel or sand and in cases of
flood plains include the point where the water surface touches the land, that land not
being the bed of the river;
“river” includes a permanent and seasonal river;
“riverine wetlands” includes wetlands along rivers and streams;
“soil” includes earth, sand, rock, shale, minerals and the flora and fauna in the soil
and the derivates thereof;
“soil erosion” means, a general process whereby soil [articles are worn away or
removed by natural agencies;
“sustainable use” means present use of the environment or natural resources
which does not compromise the ability to use the same by future generations or
degrade the carrying capacity of supporting ecosystems;
“Tribunal” means the National Environment Tribunal established under section
125 of the Act;
“water” includes drinking water, river, stream water course, reservoir, well, dam,
canal, channel, lake, swamp, open drain or underground water;
“wetlands” means areas permanently or seasonally flooded by water where
plants and animals have become adapted; and include swamps, areas of marsh, peat
land, mountain bogs, bank of rivers, vegetation, areas of impeded drainage or
brackish, salt or alkaline; including areas of marine water the depth of which at low tide
does not exceed 6 meters. It also incorporates riparian and coastal zones adjacent to
the wetlands;
“wetland products” includes fish, fibre, fruit, papyrus, grass, soil. stone, gravel,
sand and such other things as the Minister may be statutory instrument declare to be
wetland produce;
“Wetland resource use permit” means a permit granted to a person, community
or organization to make extractive utilization of wetlands and other non-extractive uses
such as tourism and cultural activities in accordance with the grant under these
Regulations or any other law;
PART II – MANAGEMENT OF WETLANDS AND WETLAND RESOURCES
3. Application of Part
This part applies to all wetlands in Kenya whether occurring in private or public land.

-- 272 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
273 [Issue 1]
4. Objectives of Part
The Objectives of this Part of the Regulations include—
(a) to provide for the conservation and sustainable use of wetlands and their
resources in Kenya;
(b) to promote the integration of sustainable use of resources in wetlands into
the local and national management of natural resources for socio-economic
development;
(c) to ensure the conservation of water catchments and the control of floods;
(d) to ensure the sustainable use of wetlands for ecological and aesthetic
purposes for the common good of all citizens;
(e) to ensure the protection of wetlands as habitats for species of fauna and
flora;
(f) provide a framework for public participation in the management of wetlands;
(g) to enhance education research and related activities; and
(h) to prevent and control pollution and siltation.
5. General Principles
(1) The following principles shall be observed in the management of all wetlands in
Kenya—
(a) Wetland resources shall be utilized in a sustainable manner compatible with
the continued presence of wetlands and their hydrological, ecological, social
and economic functions and services;
(b) Environmental impact assessment and environmental audits as required
under the Act shall be mandatory for all activities likely to hade an adverse
impact on the wetland;
(c) Special measures shall be essential to promote respect for, preserve and
maintain knowledge innovations and practices of indigenous and local
communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for the conservation
and sustainable use of biological diversity and promote their wider
application with the approval and involvement of the holders of such
knowledge, innovations and practices and encourage the equitable sharing
of the benefits arising from the utilization of such knowledge, innovations
and practices;
(d) Sustainable use of wetlands shall be integrated into the national and local
land use plans to ensure sustainable use and management of the
resources;
(e) The principle of public participation in the management of wetlands;
(f) The principle of international co-operation in the management of
environmental resources shared by two or more states;
(g) The polluter-pays principle;
(h) The pre-cautionary principle; and
(i) Public and private good.
(2) The obligations under these Regulations shall at all times take into account the
provisions of other statutes.

-- 273 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 274
6. The Standards Enforcement Review Committee
(1) The Standards and Enforcement Review Committee established under the Act
shall be responsible for advising the Authority on the wise use, management and
conservation of wetland resources.
(2) The functions of the Committee in relation to wetlands shall include—
(a) reviewing the implementation guidelines for wetlands management and
making the necessary recommendations to the Authority;
(b) reviewing and recommending regulations or guidelines to be issued by the
Authority to developers, occupiers and users; and
(c) advising the Authority on any other issues relating to conservation and
management of wetland resources.
7. The District Environment Committee
The District Environment Committee shall be responsible for coordinating, monitoring.
and advising on all aspects of wetland resource management within the District.
8. Protected Wetlands
(1) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, declare an area to be a protected
wetland where such area has national and international significance due to its—
(a) biological diversity;
(b) ecological importance;
(c) landscape;
(d) natural heritage; or
(e) aesthetic value.
(2) Upon declaration of an area to be a wetland, the following shall be the only
activities be permitted to be carried out in the area—
(a) research;
(b) eco-tourism;
(c) restoration or enhancement of the wetland; or
(d) any other activities identified in the Management plan.
(3) Notwithstanding sub-regulation (2), a protected wetland may be used for the
regulated activities set out in the Schedule.
9. Procedure for Declaration of a Protected Wetland
(1) The declaration of a protected wetland under regulations 8 may be done by the
Minister—
(a) in consultation with the relevant lead agency; or
(b) on the recommendation of the Authority on its own motion or in consultation
with the lead agency, a registered civil society organization or an individual
person.
(2) Where the Authority of its own motion or in consultation with the relevant lead
agency initiates the process of declaring an area to be a protected wetland under sub-
regulation (1), the Authority shall—
(a) by notice in the Gazette and in at least one newspaper circulating in the
local area. notify the public of its intention to declare the area to be a
protected wetland, which notice shall identify and assign terms of reference
to a task force which shall be mandated to prepare the wetland
management plan;

-- 274 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
275 [Issue 1]
(b) set up a task to prepare a wetland management plan by, incorporating the
views of the people inhabiting the areas contiguous to the wetland;
(c) cause a Strategic Environmental Assessment of the management plan to be
undertaken in accordance with the Act; and
(d) review the report containing the findings under paragraphs (b) and (c) of this
sub-regulation.
(3) Where the Authority is satisfied with the findings under sub-regulation (2) (d), it
shall submit its recommendations to the Minister for the gazettement of the wetland.
(4) Where a lead agency, a member of the public or a registered civil society
organization petitions the Authority to initiate the process for declaration of an area as a
protected wetland, the Authority shall consider the petition and may initiate the process as
set out in sub-regulation (2).
(5) Without prejudice to the foregoing, a petitioner for the declaration of a wetland,
may cause a wetland management plan to be developed in consultation with the Authority,
and the costs associated with the activities thereto shall be borne by the petitioner.
(6) Where, following a petition under subregulation (4) and (5), the Authority declines
to initiate the process of declaring an area to be a protected wetland, it shall communicate
its decision together with its reasons, to the petitioner within 60 days of the decision to
decline.
10. Inventory of Wetlands
(1) Within three years from the date of commencement of these Regulations, the
Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agency, prepare and maintain an
inventory of all wetlands in Kenya and shall cause such measures, including the
development of wetland management plans, to prevent and control degradation of such
wetlands.
(2) The inventory in sub-regulation (1) shall show for each wetland—
(a) the location;
(b) the type of fauna and flora;
(c) the soil and hydrological characteristic;
(d) the discharge, volume fluctuations and quality of water where possible;
(e) the existing uses;
(f) use of the wetland;
(g) the density of the population in the wetland catchment, drawing attention
especially to those most dependant on the wetland;
(h) the conservation status;
(i) the area of the wetland;
(j) the land tenure system in the wetland catchment; and
(k) any other factor relevant to the wetland.
(3) The boundaries of such wetlands shall be shown on all official boundary maps of
Kenya.
(4) The Authority shall periodically inspect the wetlands to determine the necessity for
revision or correction of the inventory maintained under this Regulation.
(5) The Authority may, in consultation with the relevant lead agency register changes
in the boundaries of wetlands on maps in the inventory referred to in sub-regulation(3) and
make any other necessary changes in the inventory to reflect the actual situation on the
ground.

-- 275 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 276
(6) In preparing an inventory of wetlands, the Director – General shall consult with the
District Environment Committees with a view to involving the public in determining whether
a wetland should be included in the list of wetlands of national or international importance.
(7) The Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agency, publish the
inventory of wetlands after every two years, reflecting the current state of wetlands
included in the inventory.
11. Permitted use of Wetlands
The following sustainable uses of wetland resources shall not be subject to these
Regulations—
(a) subsistence harvesting of papyrus, medicinal plants, trees and reeds;
(b) any cultivation where the cultivated area is not likely to adversely affect the
wetland;
(c) fishing, subject to the provisions of the Fisheries Act (Cap. 376);
(d) collection of water for domestic use;
(e) hunting, subject to the provisions of the Wildlife (Conservation and
Management) Act (Cap. 378);
(f) small-scale fish farming; and
(g) grazing of livestock.
12. Wetland Resource Use Permit
Subject to the provisions of Section 42 of the Act, no person shall carry out any of the
activities stipulated therein without a permit issued by the relevant lead agency and an
Environmental Impact Assessment License issued by the Authority where applicable.
13. Temporary Permit
(1) The lead agency may, after consultation with the Director-General, a grant a
temporary permit to an applicant for the use of a wetland where—
(a) there is need to use water for emergency situations pending the availability
of alternative sources of supply; or
(b) a special research project requires the use of the wetland for a specified
period of time.
(2) The temporary permit issued under this Regulation therein shall be valid for a
maximum period of three months, and may be renewed for a further period of three
months upon application by the holder with reasons to the satisfaction of the Director-
General.
14. Duty of Land Owners Users and Occupiers
(1) Every owner, occupier or user of land which is adjacent or contiguous to a wetland
shall, with advice from the Authority, have a duty to prevent the degradation or destruction
of the wetland, and shall maintain the ecological and other functions of the wetland.
(2) Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to protect a wetland under sub-
regulation (1) commits an offence.

-- 276 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
277 [Issue 1]
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF RIVER BANKS, LAKE SHORES AND SEA SHORE
15. Application of Part
This part shall apply to all river banks, lake shores and to the sea shore in Kenya.
16. Objectives of Part
The objectives of this Part include—
(a) to facilitate the sustainable utilization and conservation of resources on river
banks, lake shores, and on the seashore by and for the benefit of the
people and community living in the area;
(b) promote the integration of sustainable use of resources in riverbanks lake
shores and the seashore into the local and national management of natural
resources for socio economic development;
(c) enhance education, research and research related activities; and
(d) prevent siltation of rivers and lakes and control pollution or and other
activities likely to degrade the environment.
17. General Principles
The following principles shall be observed in the management and conservation of
river banks, lake shores and the seashore—
(a) Resources on the river banks, lake shores and the sea shore shall be
utilized in a sustainable manner;
(b) Environmental impact assessment as required under the Act shall be
mandatory for all major activities on river banks, lake shores and the
seashore; and
(c) Special measures, including prevention of soil erosion, siltation and water
pollution are essential for the protection of river banks, lake shores and the
seashore.
18. Identification and inventory of degraded river banks, lake shores and sea
shores and conservation measures
(1) Within five years from the date of commencement of these Regulations, the
Authority shall, in consultation with the relevant lead agencies—
(a) identify river bank, lake shores and the part of the seashore which are at
risk from environmental degradation;
(b) prepare and maintain an inventory of the river banks, lakeshore and the part
of the sea shore which are at risk from environmental degradation, and
cause such measures as are necessary to be taken to prevent and reduce
degradation of such areas;
(c) promote soil conservation measures along river banks, lake shores, and the
seashore, including the following—
(i) bunding;
(ii) terracing;
(iii) mulching;
(iv) tree planting or agro forestry;
(v) grassing;
(vi) Soil engineering, compaction and placement of fills;
(vii) zoning and planning;

-- 277 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 278
(viii) building of gabions;
(ix) control of grazing; and
(x) recommending the promulgation of appropriate by-laws by the
relevant local authorities.
19. Resource Use Permit
Subject to the provisions of Section 42 of the Act, no person shall carry out any of the
activities stipulated in that section without a permit issued by the relevant lead agency and
an environmental impact assessment licence issued by the Authority where applicable.
20. Duty of District Environment Committee
A District Environment Committee within whose jurisdiction an activity likely to degrade
the environment, river banks, lake shores or sea shore is taking place, shall—
(a) in writing require the lead agency to take appropriate action;
(b) ensure protection of all the riverbanks and shores; and
(c) assist local communities in conservation and sustainable utilization of the
resources and services for ecological, aesthetic and social economic
purposes.
PART IV – MISCELLANEOUS
21. Requirement for Environmental Impact Assessment
(1) A developer intending to a undertake a project which may have a significant
impact on a wetland, river bank, lake shore or the sea shore shall carry out an
environmental impact assessment in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
(2) The developer referred to in sub-regulation (1) shall carry out an environmental
audit as provided for by the Act, and the Authority to monitor such activities in accordance
with the Act.
22. Environmental Restoration Orders
The Director – General may issue Environmental Restoration orders pursuant to the
provisions of the Act in order to allow a wetland, riverbank, lake shore or the sea shore
area which has been degraded to regenerate.
23. Duty of Environment Officer
An environment officer within whose jurisdiction activities likely to degrade or are
degrading, river banks, lake shores or the sea shore are taking place, shall ensure that the
communities living near such areas participate in conservation activities and assist them in
implementing these Regulations and any other law that protects.
24. Sanitation
(1) Each local authority shall, on the advice of the Authority, make by-laws managing
solid waste and waste waters in lake shores, river banks and the sea shore areas in
accordance with the Public Health Act (Cap. 242).
(2) Where two or more districts share a river bank or lake shore, minimum sanitation
standards shall be prescribed by the Authority.

-- 278 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
279 [Issue 1]
25. Transition
Any person carrying out any activities on a wetland, riverbank, lake shore or the sea
shore immediately before the coming into force of these Regulations, shall within six
months from the coming into force thereof, take all necessary measures to ensure full
compliance with these Regulations.
26. Improvement Notice
(1) Where an inspector has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating
the provisions of these Regulations, the inspector may—
(a) issue against such person an improvement notice in accordance with the
provisions of the Act; or
(b) take such measures as are provided for under the Act.
27. Offences and Penalties
Any person who contravenes the provisions of these Regulations commits an offence
and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment for such term and such fine as are
provided for in the Act.
28. Appeals
A person aggrieved by a decision of the Director- General under these Regulations
may appeal to the Tribunal in the manner as prescribed in the Act.
29. Delegation of Powers and Functions
The Director-General may where necessary, delegate any of the functions and powers
provided for within these Regulations to any officer of the Authority or to a lead agency.
30. Operations of Regulations
These Regulations shall be in addition and not in derogation from any other
regulations relating to the environment made under any other law.
SCHEDULE
REGULATED ACTIVITIES PERMITTED WITHIN PROTECTED WETLANDS
1. Brick making.
2. Sports fishing and other recreational activities.
3. Cultivation.
4. Drainage.
5. Commercial exploitation of wetland resources. e.g. harvesting of papyrus.
6. Sewerage filtration.
7. Fishing using fishing gear and weirs.
8. Fishing farming and other forms of aquaculture.

-- 279 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 280
9. Construction of roads and railways.
10. Installation of telephone lines and other communication facilities, and
11. Burning.

-- 280 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
281 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION (NOISE AND
EXCESSIVE VIBRATION POLLUTION) (CONTROL) REGULATIONS, 2009
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – GENERAL PROHIBITIONS
3. General Prohibitions.
4. Excessive vibrations.
5. Permissible noise levels.
6. Measurement and control.
7. Exemptions.
PART III – PROVISIONS RELATING TO NOISE FROM CERTAIN SOURCES
8. Radio, TV, other sound amplifying devices.
9. Parties and social events.
10. Hawkers, peddlers, touts, street preachers.
11. Machinery.
12. Noise from motor vehicles.
13. Construction at night.
14. Noise, excessive vibrations from construction, demolition, mining or quarrying sites.
15. Environmental Impact Assessment.
PART IV – PROVISIONS RELATING TO LICENSING PROCEDURES FOR
CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
16. Licence.
17. Additional powers to the lead agencies.
18. Application to be made to the Authority.
19. Permits for fireworks, demolition, firing ranges and specific heavy industries.
20. Noise from workplaces.
21. Appeals to the Tribunal.
PART V – NOISE AND EXCESSIVE VIBRATIONS MAPPING
22. Noise and excessive vibrations mapping bodies.
23. Strategic noise and excessive vibrations maps.
24. Action plans.
25. Improvement notice.
26. Closure Notice.
27. General penalty.
28. Existing activities.

-- 281 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 282
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE – MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE INTRUSIVE NOISE
LEVELS
SECOND SCHEDULE – MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE NOISE LEVELS FOR
CONSTRUCTION SITES
THIRD SCHEDULE – MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE NOISE LEVELS FOR
MINES AND QUARRIES
FOURTH SCHEDULE – APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE TO EMIT NOISE/
VIBRATIONS IN EXCESS OF PERMISSIBLE LEVELS
FIFTH SCHEDULE – LICENSE TO EMIT NOISE/ VIBRATIONS IN EXCESS
OF PERMISSIBLE LEVELS
SIXTH SCHEDULE – APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT TO CARRY OUT
ACTIVITIES
SEVENTH SCHEDULE – PERMIT TO EMIT NOISE IN EXCESS
EIGHTH SCHEDULE – MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR STRATEGIC
NOISE AND EXCESSIVE VIBRATIONS MAPPING
NINTH SCHEDULE – MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR ACTION PLANS
TENTH SCHEDULE – IMPROVEMENT NOTICE
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE – FEES

-- 282 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
283 [Issue 1]
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION (NOISE AND
EXCESSIVE VIBRATION POLLUTION) (CONTROL) REGULATIONS, 2009
[L.N. 61/2009.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental Management and Coordination
(Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“action plan” means a plan designed for the purpose of managing noise or
excessive vibrations and their effects, including reduction of noise or excessive
vibrations;
“Authority” means the National Environment Management Authority established
under Section 7 of the Act;
“Commercial zone” means any place where goods and services are exchanged,
bought or sold;
“construction” includes erection, alteration, repair, dismantling, demolition,
structural maintenance, painting, mowing, land-clearing, earth-moving, landscaping,
grading, excavating, laying of pipes and conduits whether above or below ground
level, road, railway and highway building, concreting, installation and alteration of
equipment, and the structural installation of construction components and materials in
any form or for any purpose that includes any work in connection with the construction;
“dB(A)” means decibels of noise, measured with an A-weighted filter;
“decibe” means a dimensionless unit used in comparison of the magnitude of
sound pressure or power;
“intermittent noise” means a noise whose level suddenly drops to several times
the level of the background noise;
“intrusive noise” means external noise, or noise from another part of the building,
which penetrates the structural defences of a room or building;
“lead agency” means any Government ministry, department, parastatal, state
corporation or local authority, in which any law vests functions of control or
management of any element of the environment or natural resources;
“mapping” means the presentation of data on an existing or predicted noise or
excessive vibration situation, indicating breaches of any relevant limit value in force,
the number of people affected in a certain area or the number of dwellings exposed to
certain values of noise or excessive vibration limit in a certain area;
“mapping–body” means a noise-mapping or excessive vibration- mapping body
as designated in Regulation 22 of these Regulations;
“noise” means any undesirable sound that is intrinsically objectionable or that may
cause adverse effects on human health or the environment.

-- 283 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 284
“noise pollution” means the emission of uncontrolled noise that is likely to cause
danger to human health or damage to the environment.
“place of entertainment” means premises or any other place where activities
including amusement, enjoyment, playing of music, dancing, performing of shows take
place;
“property boundary” means the surveyed line at ground surface which separates
the facility owned, rented or leased by one or more persons from any other such
facilities.
“silent zone” means designated area that includes health facilities, educational
and research institutions, courts, and any other area declared as such by the Authority;
“sound” means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity
or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that causes compression
and rarefaction of that medium.
“sound source” means any person or thing from which sound is emitted
“Tribunal” means the National Environment Tribunal established under section
125 of the Act;
“vibration” means an oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or random
nature described by displacement, velocity or acceleration with respect to a given
reference point.
“excessive vibration” means the presence of vibration which—
(a) is of such intensity, duration, frequency or character as to annoy, disturb, or
cause or tend to cause adverse psychological or physiological effects on
persons, or to damages or tend to damage personal or real property; and
(b) exceeds 0.5 centimetres per second beyond any source property boundary
or 30 metres from any moving source.
PART II – GENERAL PROHIBITIONS
3. General Prohibitions
(1) Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations, no person shall make or cause
to be made any loud, unreasonable, unnecessary or unusual noise which annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others and the
environment.
(2) In determining whether noise is loud, unreasonable, unnecessary or unusual, the
following factors may be considered—
(a) time of the day;
(b) proximity to residential area;
(c) whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant;
(d) the level and intensity of the noise;
(e) whether the noise has been enhanced in level or range by any type of
electronic or mechanical means; and
(f) whether the noise can be controlled without much effort or expense to the
person making the noise.
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Regulation commits an offence.

-- 284 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
285 [Issue 1]
4. Excessive vibrations
(1) Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations, no person shall—
(a) make or cause to be made excessive vibrations which annoy, disturb, injure
or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of others and the
environment; or
(b) cause to be made excessive vibrations which exceed 0.5 centimetres per
second beyond any source property boundary or 30 metres from any
moving source.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Regulation commits an offence.
5. Permissible noise levels
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise in excess
of the noise levels set in the First Schedule to these Regulations, unless such noise is
reasonably necessary to the preservation of life, health, safety or property.
6. Measurement and control
(1) No person shall cause noise from any source which exceeds any sound level as
set out in the applicable column in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) Measurements shall be taken by the relevant lead agency.
(3) In any cases where there is no relevant lead agency to take the measurements, or
where the lead agency has failed to take action after being given reasonable notice by the
Authority, the measurement shall be taken by a person dully authorized by the Authority,
who is knowledgeable in the proper use of the measuring equipment.
(4) The Authority in consultation with the relevant lead agency may issue guidelines
for the measurement of noise and excessive vibration.
(5) Any person who makes noise in excess of the prescribed levels commits an
offence.
7. Exemptions
These Regulations shall not apply to—
(a) the emission of noise for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of
an emergency;
(b) the emission of noise in the performance of emergency response;
(c) the emission of noise in connection with the protection of the health and
safety of residents or their property during emergency conditions;
(d) warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, such as
police, fire and ambulance sirens, and train horns; or
(e) Parades and national celebrations.
PART III – PROVISIONS RELATING TO NOISE FROM CERTAIN SOURCES
8. Radio, TV, other sound amplifying devices
(1) No person shall use or operate any radio or receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, television set, any other machine or device for the producing or reproducing
of sound or any other sound-amplifying equipment in a loud, annoying or offensive
manner such that the, noise from the device—
(a) interferes with the comfort, repose, health or safety of members of the
public;

-- 285 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 286
(b) creates a risk thereof, within any building or, outside of a building, at a
distance of 30 meters or more from the source of such sound; or
(c) interferes with the conversation of members of the public who are 30 meters
or more from the source of such sound.
(2) Any person who contravenes this Regulation commits an offence.
(3) For the purposes of this Regulation, “person” includes—
(a) in the case of an offence that occurs on any public property where
permission was obtained to use that public property, the person or persons
who obtained permission to utilize that property for that event.
(b) in the case of an offence that occurs on private property, any adult person
or persons who live in or on the property that is involved in the offence; and
(c) in the case of an offence that occurs after granting of a license pursuant to
this Regulation, the person or persons who are listed on the license.
9. Parties and social events
(1) Any person in charge of a party or other social event which occurs on any private
or public property shall ensure that the party or event does not produce noise in a loud,
annoying or offensive manner such that noise from the party interferes with the comfort,
repose, health or safety of members of the public within any building or, outside of a
building, or recklessly creates the risk thereof, at a distance of 30 meters or more from the
source of such sound.
(2) Any person who contravenes this Regulation commits an offence.
(3) For the purposes of this Regulation, a “person in charge of a party or other social
event”—
(a) that occurs on any public property shall include the person or persons who
obtained permission to utilize that property for that event;
(b) that occurs on private property shall include the person who owns the
premises involved and any adult person who lives in or on the premises
involved in such party or social event; and
(c) shall include the person who is listed on a permit issued by the
Commissioner of Police, Local Authority or Provincial Administration with
respect to such event.
10. Hawkers, peddlers, touts street preachers
(1) No person shall—
(a) preach, tout, advertise, promote or sell any goods; or
(b) engage in any commercial activity,
in such manner as to emit noise by shouting within the Central Business District of any
town, a residential area, a silent zone, or any other area declared as a silent zone by the
Authority,
Provided that the provisions of this Regulation shall not be construed to prohibit the
selling by shouting of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting events,
parades, fairs, circuses and other similar licensed public entertainment events.
(2) Any person who contravenes this Regulation commits an offence.

-- 286 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
287 [Issue 1]
11. Machinery
(1) Any person wishing to—
(a) operate or repair any machinery, motor vehicle, construction equipment or
other equipment, pump, fan, air-conditioning apparatus or similar
mechanical device; or
(b) engage in any commercial or industrial activity,
which is likely to emit noise or excessive vibrations shall carry out the activity or activities
within the relevant levels prescribed in the First Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) Any person who contravenes this Regulation commits an offence.
12. Noise from motor vehicles
(1) No person shall operate a motor vehicle which—
(a) produces any loud and unusual sound; and
(b) exceeds 84 dB(A) when accelerating.
(2) No person shall at any time sound the horn or other warning device of a vehicle
except when necessary to prevent an accident or an incident.
(3) The provisions of the Traffic Rules (Sub. Leg.)shall apply to this Regulation.
(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Regulation commits an offence.
13. Construction at night
(1) Except for the purposes specified in sub-Regulation (2) hereunder, no person shall
operate construction equipment (including but not limited to any pile driver, steam shovel,
pneumatic hammer, derrick or steam or electric hoist) or perform any outside construction
or repair work so as to emit noise in excess of the permissible levels as set out in the
Second Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) This Regulation shall not be deemed to prohibit—
(a) any work of an emergency nature;
(b) work of a domestic nature on buildings, structures or projects being
undertaken by a person residing in such premises; or
(c) public utility construction, or, with respect to construction of public works,
projects exclusively relating to roads, bridges, airports, public schools and
sidewalks:
Provided that, if any domestic power tool, including but not limited to mechanically
powered saws, sanders, grinders and lawn and garden tools used outdoors, is operated
during the nighttime hours, no person shall operate such machinery so as to cause noise
within a residential building or across a residential real property boundary where such
noise interferes with the comfort, repose, health or safety of members of the public within
any building or, outside of a building, at 30 meters or more from the source of the sound.
14. Noise, excessive vibrations from construction, demolition, mining or quarrying
sites
(1) Where defined work of construction, demolition, mining or quarrying is to be
carried out in an area, the Authority may impose requirements on how the work is to be
carried out including but not limited to requirements regarding—
(a) machinery that may be used; and
(b) the permitted levels of noise as stipulated in the Second and Third
Schedules to these Regulations.

-- 287 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 288
(2) The relevant lead agency shall ensure that mines and quarries where explosives
and machinery used are located in designated areas and not less than two kilometers
away from human settlements.
(3) Any person carrying out construction, demolition, mining or quarrying work shall
ensure that the vibration levels do not exceed 0.5 centimetres per second beyond any
source property boundary or 30 metres from any moving source.
(4) Any person who contravenes sub-regulations (1) and (3) of this Regulation
commits an offence.
15. Environmental Impact Assessment
Any person intending to carry out construction, demolition, mining or quarrying work
shall, during the Environmental Impact Assessment studies-
(a) identify natural resources, land uses or activities which may be affected by
noise or excessive vibrations from the construction, demolition, mining or
quarrying;
(b) determine the measures which are needed in the plans and specifications to
minimize or eliminate adverse construction, demolition, mining or quarrying
noise or vibration impacts; and
(c) incorporate the needed abatement measures in the plans and
specifications.
PART IV – PROVISIONS RELATING TO LICENSING PROCEDURES FOR
CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
16. Licence
(1) Where a sound source is planned, installed or intended to be installed or modified
by any person in such a manner that such source shall create or is likely to emit noise or
excessive vibrations, or otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of these Regulations,
such person shall apply for a licence to the Authority.
(2) No person shall use any sound-amplifying equipment in such a way that such
equipment is or is likely to be heard outside of any building between 9:00 p.m. of any day
and 7:30 a.m. of the next day, without a valid license.
(3) Where any person uses or plans to use a public-address system which is likely to
emit sound outside of a building, such person shall secure a license under these
Regulations.
(4) An application for the license shall provide the following information—
(a) the reasons for such usage, including a demonstration as to why it is
desirable or necessary that the sound source involved be authorized by a
licence pursuant to this Regulation;
(b) plans and specifications of the use;
(c) noise-abatement and control methods to be used with respect to the sound
source involved;
(d) the period of time during which the license shall apply;
(e) the name of the person(s) who is responsible for ensuring that the activity
complies with any license issued for it pursuant to this Regulation; and

-- 288 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
289 [Issue 1]
(f) evidence that notification of the application for the license has been given to
each person reasonably expected to be affected by the noise, the content of
such notification and the manner in which such notification has been given,
if the event is not a community-wide or public event:
Provided that the notification shall state that any person objecting to the granting of
such a license may contact the appropriate office to whom the application is being made
to express his/her opposition to the granting of the license.
(5) Any licence granted shall state that the licence only applies to these Regulations.
17. Additional powers to the lead agencies
In order to further the purposes of these Regulations and to facilitate compliance and
enforcement, the relevant lead agencies shall have power to attach such other conditions
in relation to these Regulations as they may deem necessary to a license or permit issued
thereunder.
18. Application to be made to the Authority
(1) An application for a license shall be made to the Authority in the form prescribed in
the Fourth Schedule to these Regulations and shall be accompanied by the prescribed
fee.
(2) When determining if a licence should be issued, the factors the Authority shall
consider shall include but shall not be limited to—
(a) the level of the noise or excessive vibrations;
(b) the proximity of the noise or excessive vibrations to accommodation or
residential facilities;
(c) the time of the day or night the noise or excessive vibrations occur;
(d) the time duration of the noise or excessive vibrations; and
(e) the impact of the noise on persons living or working in different places or
premises who are affected by the noise or excessive vibrations;
(3) The Authority shall process the application for a licence within two (2) days from
the date of receipt of the application, failure to which the applicant shall be free to proceed
with the activity in respect of which the application is made.
(4) A license shall contain requirements relating to the manner in which the activities
are to be carried out and may, in particular specify—
(a) the equipment or material to be used;
(b) the hours during which the activities may be carried out;
(c) the level of noise or vibrations which may be emitted in excess of the
permissible levels;
(d) the activities and the method by which they are to be carried out; and
(e) the steps proposed to be taken to minimize noise or excessive vibrations
resulting from the activities.
(5) The Authority shall issue a license in the form prescribed in the Fifth Schedule to
these Regulations.
(6) A license issued under this Regulation shall be valid for a period not exceeding
seven (7) days.

-- 289 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 290
19. Permits for fireworks, demolition, firing ranges and specific heavy duty
industry
(1) No person shall carry out activities relating to fireworks, demolitions, firing ranges
or specific heavy industry without a valid permit issued by the Authority.
(2) An application for a permit shall be made to the Authority in the form prescribed in
the Sixth Schedule to these Regulations and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(3) The Authority may, on receiving an application, issue the applicant with a permit to
carry out fireworks, demolitions, firing ranges and specific heavy industrial work, in the
form set out in the Seventh Schedule to these Regulations, on such terms and conditions
as may be contained in the permit.
(4) A permit to carry out activities such as fireworks, demolitions, firing ranges and
specific heavy industry shall be valid for a period not exceeding three months.
(5) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Regulation commits an offence.
20. Noise from workplaces
The provisions of The Factories and Other Places of Work (Noise Prevention and
Control) Rules, 2005 (L.N. 24/2005) shall apply mutatis mutandis to these Regulations.
21. Appeals to the Tribunal
Any applicant who is aggrieved by the refusal of the Authority to grant a license or a
permit may appeal to the Tribunal.
PART V – MAPPING OF NOISE AND EXCESSIVE VIBRATIONS
22. Noise and excessive vibrations mapping bodies
The following shall be the designated mapping bodies for the purpose of making and
approving strategic noise or vibration maps—
(a) the Ministry responsible for physical planning;
(b) local authorities;
(c) for railways, the Kenya Railways Corporation;
(d) for airports, the Kenya Airports Authority;
(e) for mines and quarries, the Mines and Geology Department;
(f) for weather and instrumentation, the Meteorological Department;
(g) the Kenya Bureau of Standards; and
(h) for major roads—
(i) where such roads are classified as national roads in accordance with
the Kenya Roads Act, 2007, Highway Act, the Kenya Roads Board;
and
(ii) for any other road, the relevant local authority; and
(iii) such other body or institution as the Minister may deem appropriate.
23. Strategic noise and excessive vibrations maps
(1) Each mapping body shall make a strategic noise or vibration map for its area.
(2) Each mapping body shall review its strategic noise or vibration map every five
years from the date on which the strategic noise or vibration map was made, or earlier
where there is significant change in land use or noise or vibration level.

-- 290 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
291 [Issue 1]
(3) A strategic noise or excessive vibration map shall satisfy the minimum
requirements set out in the Eighth Schedule to these Regulations.
(4) Every mapping body shall take immediate action to mitigate any significant noise
or excessive vibration that may cause damage to the environment or human beings.
24. Action plans
(1) Each mapping body shall prepare an action plan relevant to its area.
(2) An action plan shall—
(a) satisfy the minimum requirements set out in the Ninth Schedule to these
regulations; and
(b) aim to protect silent zones.
(3) A mapping body shall ensure that—
(a) the public is consulted on proposals for each action plan;
(b) the public is given early and effective opportunities to participate and review
action plans;
(c) a time limit not exceeding sixty (60) days is given for the submission of
written comments by the public;
(d) the results of public participation are taken into account in finalizing action
plans or review of action plans;
(e) the public is informed of the decision taken in relation to action plans; and
(f) reasonable time frames are adopted to allow sufficient time for each stage
of public participation.
(4) An action plan shall be reviewed every five years after the date on which it was
made or last reviewed, provided that an action plan may be reviewed earlier in the event
of a material change in land use or noise or vibration level in the area concerned.
25. Improvement notice
(1) Where an Environmental Inspector has reasonable cause to believe that any
person is emitting or is likely to emit noise or excessive vibration in any area in excess of
the maximum permissible levels, or is causing or is likely to cause annoyance, the
Environmental Inspector may, with the approval of the Director-General, in consultation
with the relevant lead agency, serve an improvement notice on that person in the form
prescribed in the Tenth Schedule, directing all or any or all of the following—
(a) the cessation of the noise or excessive vibration, or prevention or
discontinuance of any annoyance, or prohibiting or restricting its occurrence
or reoccurrence;
(b) compliance with the permissible noise or excessive vibration levels;
(c) the reduction of the level of noise or excessive vibration emanating from the
premises to a level specified in the notice;
(d) requiring the carrying out of an environmental audit;
(e) compelling a lead agency to take measures to prevent, discontinue or stop
the emission of the noise or excessive vibration;
(f) the prevention of any subsequent increase in the level of noise or excessive
vibration emanating from the premises or area;
(g) issue such directions intended to contribute to the reduction of emission of
noise or excessive vibration from or within the vicinity of a specified area;
(h) the execution of such works, and the taking of such steps, as may be
specified in the notice; or

-- 291 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 292
(i) carrying out of any other order as may be issued.
(2) Any person who fails or refuses to not comply with the conditions in an
improvement notice commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not
exceeding five hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
more than twenty four months, or to both.
26. Closure Notice
Where there is continuous emission of noise or excessive vibration after the
Environmental Inspector has issued an improvement notice, the Environmental Inspector
may, with the approval of the Director General, and in consultation with the relevant lead
agency, order the closure of an establishment or undertaking emitting such noise or
excessive vibration.
27. Existing activities
Any person carrying out activities that emit noise or excessive vibration immediately
before the coming into force of these Regulations shall, within six months from the coming
into force thereof, these Regulations, take all necessary measures to ensure full
compliance with these Regulations.
28. General penalty
Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of these Regulations, for which no
penalty is stipulated, commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not
exceeding more than three hundred and fifty thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding eighteen months or to both.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Regulation 5, 6 (1), 11 (1).]
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE NOISE LEVELS
Zone Sound Level Limits
dB(A)
Noise Rating Level (NR)
(Leq,14 h) (Leq,14 h)
Day Night Day Night
A. Silent Zone 40 35 30 25
B Places of worship 40 35 30 25
C. Residential: Indoor 45 35 35 25
Outdoor 50 35 40 25
D. Mixed residential (with some
commercial and places of
entertainment)
55 35 50 25
E. Commercial 60 35 55 25
Time Frame
Day: 6.01 a.m. – 8.00 p.m. (Leq, 14 h)
Night: 8.01 p.m. – 6.00 a.m. (Leq, 10h)

-- 292 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
293 [Issue 1]
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Regulation 13 (1), 14 (1) (b).]
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE NOISE LEVELS FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES
(Measurement taken within the facility)
Facility Maximum Noise Level Permitted (Leq) in dB(A)
Day Night
(i) Health facilities, educational institutions,
homes for disabled etc.
60 35
(ii) Residential 60 35
(iii) Areas other than those prescribed in (i)
and (ii)
75 65
Time Frame:
Day: 6.01 a.m. – 6.00 p.m. (Leq, 14 h)
Night: 6.01 p.m. – 6.00 a.m. (Leq, 14 h)
THIRD SCHEDULE
[Regulation 14 (1) (b).]
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE NOISE LEVELS FOR MINES AND QUARRIES
(Measurement taken within the facility)
Facility Limit Value in dB (C) Max
1. For any building used as a health facility, educational
institution, convalescent home, old age home or
residential building
109 dB (C)
2. For any building in an area used for residential and one or
more of the following purposes: commerce, small-scale
production, entertainment, or any residential apartment in
an area that is used for purposes of industry, commerce
or small-scale production, or any building used for the
purpose of industry, commerce or small-scale production.
114 dB (C)
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 18(1).]
APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE TO EMIT NOISE/ VIBRATIONS IN EXCESS OF
PERMISSIBLE LEVELS
1. Name of Applicant: .........................................................................................................................
Address: .........................................................................................................................................
ID No. / Passport No. .....................................................................................................................
Tel.: .............................................................Mobile: ......................................................................
Fax .............................................................. E-mail: ......................................................................

-- 293 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 294
FOURTH SCHEDULE—continued
2. Physical Address of Premises or facility where Noise/Excessive vibrations will be produced:
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
(Sub-location, Location, Division, District, Street, House Number)
3. Source of noise ..............................................................................................................................
Activity/Purpose .............................................................................................................................
Predicted levels: .............................................................................................................................
4. Describe the neighborhood within a radius of 2 kms (describe whether industrial, residential,
commercial and whether it is near a school, hospital or residential area):
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
5. State the measures intended to be used in controlling the noise/excessive vibrations (may
attach separate sheet):
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
6. Intended time of noise/ excessive vibrations emission (indicate time of day):
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
Date: ............................................... Signature of Applicant: ...............................................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Date received .......................................................................................................................................
Fees paid ..............................................................................................................................................
Approved / Not Approved .....................................................................................................................
Comments
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Officer .......................................... Sign ............................................... Date ......................................
Countersigned ............................................................ Date ...............................................................
FIFTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 18(5).]
LICENSE TO EMIT NOISE/ VIBRATIONS IN EXCESS OF PERMISSIBLE LEVELS
License No. ........................................... NEMA/LNC/ (NAME) ............................................................
of ...........................................................................................................................................................
(Address)
Is hereby licensed to cause emission or emit noise/excessive vibrations in excess of the permissible
noise levels at .......................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
(Location, Street, District)

-- 294 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
295 [Issue 1]
FIFTH SCHEDULE—continued
Activity: .................................................................................................................................................
This License is valid from: ........................................... /............................................../20 ............... to
......................./ ................... /20 ................ from the hours of ........................................................... to
...................................................... of each day.
This License is granted subject to the following conditions:
1. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
Date: ............................................................. Signature: ......................................................................
(Seal)
...............................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................
Director General
National Environment Management Authority
SIXTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 19(2).]
APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT TO CARRY OUT ACTIVITIES
FIREWORKS
DEMOLITIONS
FIRING RANGES
SPECIFIC HEAVY INDUSTRIES
OTHER (SPECIFY) ............................................
1. Name of Applicant: .........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
Address: .........................................................................................................................................
ID No. / Passport No. .....................................................................................................................
Tel.: .............................................................Mobile: ......................................................................
Fax .............................................................. E-mail: ......................................................................
Personal Identification No. (PIN): ...................................................................................................
2. Physical Address of Premises or facility where Noise will be produced:
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
(Sub-location, Location, Division, District, Street, House Number)
3. Source of noise ..............................................................................................................................
Activity/Purpose .............................................................................................................................
Predicted levels: .............................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................

-- 295 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 296
SIXTH SCHEDULE—continued
4. Describe the neighbourhood within a radius of 2 kms (describe whether industrial, residential,
commercial and whether it is near a school, hospital or residential area):
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
5. State the measures intended to be used in controlling the noise (may attach separate sheet):
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
6. Intended time of noise emission (indicate time of day):
........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
Date: ................................................................... Signature of Applicant: .......................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Date received .......................................................................................................................................
Fees paid ..............................................................................................................................................
Approved / Not Approved .....................................................................................................................
Comments
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
Officer .......................................... Sign ............................................... Date ......................................
Countersigned ............................................................ Date ...............................................................
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 19(3).]
PERMIT TO EMIT NOISE IN EXCESS FOR THE FOLLOWING ACTIVITIES
FIREWORKS
DEMOLITIONS
FIRING RANGES
SPECIFIC HEAVY INDUSTRIES
OTHER (SPECIFY) ............................................
Permit No. ..................................................... NEMA/PNC/ (NAME) ...................................................
of ...........................................................................................................................................................
(Address)
Is hereby permitted to cause emission or emit noise in excess of the permissible noise levels at ......
...............................................................................................................................................................
(Location, Street, District)

-- 296 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
297 [Issue 1]
SEVENTH SCHEDULE—continued
Activity: Fireworks/ Demolition/ Firing range/ Heavy industry*(specify)
This Permit is valid from: ............................................. /............................................../20 ............... to
......................./ ................... /20 ................ from the hours of ........................................................... to
...................................................... of each day.
This Permit is granted subject to the following conditions:-
1. This Permit shall be for the period provided in the validity clause above. ......................................
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
Date: ............................................................. Signature: ......................................................................
(Seal)
.............................................................................
Director General
National Environment Management Authority
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 23(3).]
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR STRATEGIC NOISE AND EXCESSIVE VIBRATIONS
MAPPING
1. A strategic noise or excessive vibration map is the presentation of data on the
following aspects—
(a) an existing, previous or predicted noise or excessive vibration situation in
terms of a noise or vibration level;
(b) the exceeding of a limit value;
(c) the estimated number of buildings, educational institutions and health
facilities in a certain area that are exposed to specific noise or excessive
vibration levels;
(d) the estimated number of people located in an area exposed to noise or
excessive vibration; or
(e) The mitigation measures for minimizing the noise or excessive vibration.
2. strategic noise or excessive vibration maps may be presented to the public as—
(a) graphical plots;
(b) numerical data in tables; or
(c) numerical data in electronic form.

-- 297 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 298
NINTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 24(2)(a).]
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR ACTION PLANS
1. An action plan shall indicate the following elements—
(a) A description of the local authority, the major road, the railway or airport and
other noise or excessive vibrations sources taken into account;
(b) The responsible lead agency;
(c) The legal context;
(d) Any statutory limit values in place;
(e) a summary of the results of the noise or excessive vibration mapping;
(f) a record of the public consultations organized;
(g) any noise or excessive vibration reduction measures already in force and any
projects in preparation;
(h) actions which the mapping body intends to take in the next five years,
including any measures to preserve silent areas; or
(i) long-term strategy.
2. The actions which the mapping body intends to take in the field within its competence
may include—
(a) traffic planning;
(b) land- use planning;
(c) technical measures at noise or excessive vibration sources;
(d) selection of quieter sources;
(e) reduction of sound transmission;
(f) regulatory or economic measures or incentives; or
(g) Procedure for carrying out an activity.
TENTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 25(1).]
IMPROVEMENT NOTICE
Form NEMA/NC
To: ........................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
TAKE NOTICE that on the ....................................... of ................... 20 ............... an Environmental
Inspector carried out an inspection of your establishment/facility located in ........................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
(physical address) where it was found that you or your agents were generating or producing noise/
excessive vibration in excess of the permissible levels in contravention of the Environmental
Management and Co-ordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution Control) Regulation, 2008.

-- 298 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
299 [Issue 1]
TENTH SCHEDULE—continued
The Environmental Inspector particularly found the following:
1. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
2. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
3. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
4. ........................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................................................
(attach more paper if necessary)
You ARE HEREBY DIRECTED to reduce the noise/ excessive vibration levels to the permissible
levels in the above mentioned facility/establishment within a period of ............................ hours/ days
from the date of this Notice.
You ARE NOTIFIED THAT in accordance with Sections 137 and 140 of the Environmental
Management and Coordination Act, 1999, failure to comply with this Notice shall result in criminal
prosecution being instituted against you and/or your agent or both.
Name: ...................................................................................................................................................
Signature: .............................................................................................................................................
ENVIRONMENTAL INSPECTOR
c.c.
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
[Regulation 18(1), 19(2).]
FEES
Ksh.
1. Application for discharge of effluent into the environment
(a) Sewerage service providers 5,000
(b) Discharging facility in Schedule 4 other than (a) above 5,000
(c) Any other institution 5,000
2. Annual License fee for discharge of effluent into the environment
(a) Sewerage service providers sector—
Category (I) ≥- 80,000 M DWF Design Capacity 500,000
Category (II) ≥ 60,000 < 80,000m3 DWF Design Capacity 400,000
Category (III) ≥ 40,000<60,000m 3 DWF Design Capacity 300,000
Category (IV) ≥ 20,000m3 < 40,000m3 DWF Design Capacity 200,000
Category (V) 20,000m3 DWF Design capacity 100
Discharging facility in Schedule 4 other than (a) above - and for– 100,000
(i) Petroleum sector
Category (I) Depots, pump stations and refineries 100,000

-- 299 of 302 --

No. 8 of 1999 [Rev. 2012]
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
[Issue 1] 300
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE—continued
Ksh.
Category (II) Service station (Filing station + Vehicle service + carwash) 75,000
Category (III) Service station (Filling station + Vehicle service) 50,000
Category (IV) Filling station ≥ 50M3 (Tank Storage) 30,000
Category (V) Filling Station < 50M3 (Tank storage) 25,000
(ii) Hotels, Camps and lodges sector
Category (I) ≤ 25 persons bed capacity 25,000
Category (II) > 25 ≤ 50 persons bed capacity 30,000
Category (III) > 50 ≤ 75 persons bed capacity 50,000
Category (IV) >75 ≤ 100 Persons bed capacity 75,000
Category (V) >100 Persons bed capacity 100,000
(iii) Agro-based Processing Industries
Category (i) ≥ 2,000 M3 DWF Design capacity 100,000
Category (ii) ≥ 1500 <2,000 M3 DWF Design capacity 75,000
Category (iii) ≥ 1000 < 1500 M3 DWF Design capacity 50,000
Category (iv) ≥ 1,000 M3 DWF Design capacity 30,000
(iv) Abbartoirs/slaughterhouses
Category (i) ≥ 40 animals per day 100,000
Category (ii) ≥ 20 < 40 animals per day 75,000
Category (iii) ≥ 6 < 20 animals per day 50,000
Category (iv) < animals per day 20,000
(v) Chemical-based Processing Industries
Category (i) ≥2,000 m3 DWF Design Capacity 100,000
Category (ii) ≥1500<2,000 m 3 DWF Design Capacity 75,000
Category (iii) ≥ 1000 < 1500 m3 DWF Design Capacity 50,000
Category (iv) < 1,000 m 3 DWF Design Capacity 30,000
(vi) Intensive Chemical Agriculture
Category (i) ≥ 40 HA Acreage 100,000
Category (ii) ≥ 30 < 40 HA Acreage 75,000
Category (iii) ≥ 20< 30 HA Acreage 50,000
Category (iv) ≥ 10 < 20 HA Acreage 30,000
Category (v) < 10 HA Acreage 20,000
(a) Institutions, commercial or residential premiseswith population > 100 persons 20,000
(b) Commercial or residential premises with populations ≤ 50 ≤ 100 persons 10,000

-- 300 of 302 --

[Rev. 2012] No. 8 of 1999
Environmental Management and Co-ordination
[Subsidiary]
301 [Issue 1]
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE—continued
Ksh.
(c) Others
3. Inspection of records/effluent register 200
4. Variation of effluent discharge licence 10% of the Annual Licence fee

-- 301 of 302 --

-- 302 of 302 --