SPECIAL ISSUE
Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 207 (Acts No. 33)
REPUBLIC OF KENYA
KENYA GAZETTE SUPPLEMENT
ACTS, 2015
NAIROBI, 24th December, 2015
CONTENT
Act—
PAGE
The Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015 1953
NATIONALCOUNCIL FOR LAW RE C4; fr:C
RECEIVED

P. 0, 8*
NAIRCai,
TEL: -7 1,231 FAX: 27124
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NAIROBI
r

-- 1 of 118 --

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND ASSET
DISPOSAL ACT
No. 33 of 2015
Date of Assent: 18th December, 2015
Date of Commencement: 7th January, 2016
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
PART I—PRELIMINARY
1— Short title.
2—Interpretation.
3 —Guiding principles.
4—Application of Act.
5—Conflicts with other Acts.
6—Conflict with international agreements.
PART II—BODIES INVOLVED IN THE
REGULATION OF PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND
ASSET DISPOSAL
A—Role of the National Treasury in Public Procurement
and Assets Disposal
7—Role of the National Treasury in Public Procurement
and Assets Disposal
B —Public Procurement Regulatory Authority
8—The Public Procurement Regulatory Authority.
9—Functions of Authority.
10— Public Procurement Regulatory Board.
11—Qualifications of members of the Board.
12—Functions of the Board.
13—Tenure of office.
14—Procedures of the Board.
15—Director-General of the Authority.
16—Term of office of Director-General.
17—Functions of the Director-General.
18—Restrictions on activities of Director-General.

-- 2 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
19—Terms and conditions of service of Director-General
and staff.
20—Vacancy of office.
21—Removal of Director-General.
22—Acting Director-General.
23—Staff of the Authority.
24—Financial arrangements.
25—Audit.
26—Annual reports.
C—Public Procurement Administrative Review Board
27—Establishment of the Public Procurement
Administrative Review Board.
28—Functions and powers of the Review Board.
29--Composition of the Review Board.
30—Qualifications of members of the Review Board.
31—Tenure of office.
32—Terms and conditions of service of the Review Board
members.
PART HI— COUNTY GOVERNMENT
RESPONSIBILITIES WITH RESPECT TO PUBLIC
PROCUREMENT AND ASSET DISPOSAL
33—Roles and Responsibilities of the County Government.
PART IV—POWERS TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE
34—Powers to ensure compliance.
35—Investigations.
36—Powers of investigators.
37—Report of investigation.
38—Order by the Director-General.
39—Request for a Judicial review.
40—No investigation if issue before Review Board.
41—Debarment.
42—Judicial Review.

-- 3 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
43—Inspections, Assessments and Reviews relating to
contracts, procurement and asset disposal
proceedings.
PART V —INTERNAL ORGANISATION OF
PROCURING ENTITIES
44—Responsibilities of the accounting officer.
45—Corporate decisions and segregation of
responsibilities.
46—Evaluation Committee.
47—Procurement function.
48—Inspection and acceptance committee.
49—Sector-specific procuring and disposal agencies.
50—Consortium buying.
51—Procuring agents or asset disposal agents.
52—Transfer of procuring responsibility to another public
entity or procuring agent.
PART VI —GENERAL PROCUREMENT
PRINCIPLES
53—Procurement and asset disposal planning.
54—Procurement pricing and requirement not to split of
contracts.
55—Eligibility to bid.
56—Use of list of another state organ or public entity. ,
57—List of registered suppliers.
58—Standard procurement and asset disposal documents.
59—Limitation on contracts with state and public officers.
60—Specific requirements.
61—Tender security.
62—Declaration not to engage in corruption.
63—Termination or cancellation of procurement and asset
disposal proceedings.
64—Form of communications, electronic procurement and
asset disposal..
No. 33

-- 4 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
65—Inappropriate influence on evaluations, etc.
66—Corrupt, coercive, obstructive, collusive or fraudulent
practice, conflicts of interest.
67—Confidentiality.
68—Procurement records.
69—Procurement approvals.
PART VII —BASIC PROCUREMENT RULES
70—Standard tender documents.
71—Registration of suppliers.
72—Responsibility for complying with Act, etc.
73—Initiation of procurement process.
74—Invitation to tender.
75—Modifications to tender documents.
76—Modification of bids.
77—Submission and receipt of tenders.
78—Opening of tenders.
79—Responsiveness of tenders.
80—Evaluation of tenders.
81—Clarifications.
82— No correction of errors.
83—Post-qualification.
84—Professional opinion.
85—Recommendation for contract awards.
86—Successful tender.
87—Notification of intention to enter into a contract.
88—Extension of tender validity period.
89—International tendering and competition.
PART VIII- CLASSIFIED PROCUREMENT
METHODS AND PROCEDURES
90—Classified procurements and disposals.

-- 5 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
PART IX— METHODS OF PROCUREMENT OF
GOODS, WORKS AND SERVICES
91—Choice of procurement procedure.
92—Methods of procurement.
93—Pre-qualification.
94—Prequalification documents.
95—Approval of pre-qualified candidates.
Details of Procurement Methods
A - Open Tender
96—Advertisement.
97—Time for preparing tenders.
98—Provision of tender documents.
B— Two-Stage Tendering
99—Two-Stage Tendering.
C—Design Competition
100—Condition for use of design competitions.
101—Procedure for design competition.
D—Restricted Tendering
102—Restricted tendering.
E—Direct Procurement
103—When direct procurement may be used.
104—Procedure for direct procurement.
F —Request for Quotations
105—When request for quotations may be used.
106—Procedure for request for quotations.
G— Low - Value Procurement
107—When low-value procurement may be used.
108—Procedure for low-value procurement.
H — Force Account
109—Force Account.
No. 33

-- 6 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
I — Electronic Reverse Auction
110—Reverse Auction.
111—Conditions for use of reverse auctions.
112—Procedure for reverse auction.
113—Successful reverse auctioneering bid.
114—Framework agreement.
PART X— PROCUREMENT OF CONSULTANCY
SERVICES
115—Application of this Part.
116— When request for proposals may be used.
117—Terms of reference and invitation of tenders from
shortlisted firms.
118—Request for proposal inviting expression of interest.
119—Notice inviting expressions of interest.
120— Opening of proposals.
121—Evaluation and shortlisting.
122—Determination of qualified persons.
123— Request for proposals to qualified persons.
124—Selection methods for requests for proposals.
125—Time for preparing proposals.
126—Evaluation of proposals.
127— Successful proposal.
128—Negotiations with successful request for proposal
tenderer.
129—Contract requirements.
130—Restriction on entering into related contracts.
131—Competitive Negotiations.
132—Procedure for Competitive Negotiations.
133—Successful best and final offer.
PART XI—PROCUREMENT CONTRACTS
134—Preparation of contracts.

-- 7 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
135—Creation of procurement contracts.
136—Refusal to sign contract.
137—Changes to contract responsibilities.
138—Publication of procurement contracts.
139—Amendments or variations to contracts.
140—Interest on overdue amounts and liquidated damages.
141—Framework Contracting.
142—Performance Security.
143—Nature of performance security.
144—Seizure of the performance Security.
145—Recovery of the performance Security.
146—Advance payment.
147—Amount of advance payment and its security.
148—Use of advance payment.
149—Sub-contracting.
150—Contract administration.
151—Complex and specialized contract implementation
team.
152—Contract monitoring.
153—Termination of contract.
154—Contract close out.
PART XII—PREFERENCES AND RESERVATION
IN PROCUREMENT
156— Requirement for preferences and reservations.
156— Eligibility for more than one preference scheme.
157—Participation of candidates in preference and
reservations.
158—Procurement plans and monitoring compliance.
PART XIII—INVENTORY CONTROL, ASSET AND
STORES MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
159—Receipt, and recording of goods, works and services.
No. 33

-- 8 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
160—Objectives of Inventory Control, Asset and Stores
Management and Distribution.
161—Inventory, Stores and Assets Management system.
162—Management of Inventory, Stores and Assets.
PART XIV —DISPOSAL OF ASSETS
163—Disposal committee.
164—Disposal procedure.
165—Methods of disposal.
166—Restriction on disposal to employees, etc.
PART XV— ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF
PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL PROCEEDINGS
167—Request for a review.
168— Notification of review and suspension of
proceedings.
169— Rejection of requests by Review Board Secretariat.
170—Parties to review.
171—Completion of review.
172—Dismissal of frivolous appeals.
173— Powers of Review Board.
174—Right to review is additional right.
175—Right to judicial review to procurement.
PART XVI —OFFENCES AND SANCTIONS
176—Prohibitions and offences.
177—General penalty and sanctions.
178—Protection from personal liability and indemnity.
PART XVII —POLICY OPERATIONALIZATION
AND REVIEW
179—Consultative meetings.
180—Making of Regulations.
181—Code of Ethics.

-- 9 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
PART XVIII —REPEAL, TRANSITION AND
SAVINGS PROVISIONS
182—Repeal of No. 3 of 2005 and savings.
183—Transitional provisions.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE—Conduct of Business and Affairs of
the Board.
SECOND SCHEDULE—Conduct of Business and Affairs
of the Review Board.
THIRD SCHEDULE—Transitional Provisions.
No. 33

-- 10 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
AN ACT of Parliament to give effect to Article 227 of
the Constitution; to provide procedures for
efficient public procurement and for assets disposal
by public entities; and for connected purposes
ENACTED by Parliament of Kenya, as follows —
PART I —PRELIMINARY
1. This Act may be cited as the Public Procurement
and Asset Disposal Act, 2015.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
"accounting officer" has the meaning assigned to it
under section 2 of the Public Finance Management Act,
2012;
"appeal" means a request for administrative review or
complaint filed with the Appeals Review Board pursuant to
section 167 of this Act;
"assets" means movable and immovable property,
tangible and intangible, including immovable property,
stores, equipment, land, buildings, animals, inventory,
stock, natural resources like wildlife, intellectual rights
vested in the state or proprietary rights;
"Authority" means the Public Procurement Regulatory
Authority established under section 8 of this Act;
"Board" means the Public Procurement Regulatory
Board established under section 10 of this Act;
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary for
the time being responsible for matters relating to finance;
"candidate" means a person who has obtained the
tender documents from a public entity pursuant to an
invitation notice by a procuring entity;
"citizen contractor" means a person or a firm wholly
owned and controlled by persons who are citizens of
Kenya;
"common-user items" means goods, works or services
that are usable by procuring entities across the board
irrespective of type or category, and the items include
office equipment, furniture, motor vehicles and stationery;

Short title.
Interpretation.
No. 18 of 2012.

-- 11 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
"complex and specialized contracts" means contracts
that include procurement where the terms and conditions of
an agreement are different from standard commercial terms
and conditions;
"consultancy services" means services of
predominantly an intellectual, technical or advisory nature,
and includes services offered by all professionals;
"contract period" means the period between contract
signing and the end of the defects liability period;
"contract administration" means management of terms
of procurement or asset disposal contracts made with
contractors or suppliers after tender award by a procuring
entity, for the purpose of assuring compliance with
obligations such as timely delivery, quality and quantity
inspection, acceptance, payment, claims, dispute resolution
and completion, among other terms;
"contractor" means a person who enters into a
procurement contract with a procuring entity, and includes
the main contractor;
"corruption" has the meaning assigned to it under
section 2 of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act No. 3 of 2003.
2003;
"design competition" means a procurement procedure
for obtaining competitive tenders for services which are
creative in nature and which require that part of the
services be carried as part of the tender to facilitate
evaluation of the tenders and such services may include
architecture, landscaping, engineering, urban design
projects, urban and regional planning, fine arts, interior
design, marketing, advertising and graphic designs;
"Director-General" means the Director-General of the
Authority provided for under section 15 of this Act;
"disadvantaged group" means persons denied by
mainstream society access to resources and tools that are
useful for their survival in a way that disadvantages them
or individuals who have been subjected to prejudice or
cultural bias because of their identities as members of
groups or categories of persons without regard to their
individual qualities, and includes enterprises in which a
majority of the members or shareholders are youth, women,
persons with disability or categories as shall be prescribed;

-- 12 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
"disposal" means the divestiture of public assets,
including intellectual and proprietary rights and goodwill
and other rights of a procuring entity by any means
including sale, rental, lease, franchise, auction or any
combination however classified;
"electronic reverse auction" means an online real-time
purchasing technique utilized by the procuring entity to
select the successful submission, which involves the
presentation by tenderers, suppliers or contractors of
successively lowered bids during a scheduled period of
time and the automatic evaluation of bids;
"e-procurement" means the process of procurement
using electronic medium such as the internet or other
information and communication technologies;
"framework agreement" means a pact between a
procuring entity and a selected supplier (or suppliers) or
contractor (or contractors) identified for a definite term to
supply goods works or service whose quantities and
delivery schedules are not definable or determinable at the
beginning.
"framework contract" means a pact between a
procuring entity and a selected supplier (or suppliers) or
contractor (or contractors) identified for a definite term to
supply goods works or service whose quantities and
deliveries are not definable or determinable at the
beginning, with a commitment to order a minimum
quantity of the required goods, works, or services;
"fraudulent practice" includes a misrepresentation of
fact in order to influence a procurement or disposal process
or the exercise of a contract to the detriment of the
procuring entity or the tenderer or the contractor, and
includes collusive practices amongst tenderers prior to or
after tender submission designed to establish tender prices
at artificial non-competitive levels and to deprive the
procuring entity of the benefits of free and open
competition;
"financial year" has the meaning assigned to it under
Article 260 of the Constitution;
"fiscal agency" means a person or an organization, or
trust company, that acts on behalf of the Government of
Kenya in performing various financial duties, including

-- 13 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
assistance in the arrangement for issuance of international
sovereign bonds, redemption of bonds or coupons, handle
tax issues, replace lost or damaged securities;
"goods" includes raw materials, products, equipment,
commodities in solid, liquid or gaseous form, electricity
and services that are incidental to the supply of the goods,
works and services;
"loans" has the meaning assigned to it under Article
260 of the Constitution;
"locally produced product or service" means goods
and services that are manufactured in Kenya by firms that
are registered and undertaking their business in Kenya;
"obstruction" means acts intended to materially
impede access to required information in exercising a duty
under this Act;
"person" has meaning assigned to it in Article 260 of
the Constitution and includes sole proprietorship;
"person with disability" means a person with disability
who has attained the age of eighteen years and includes a
company, association or body of persons, corporate or
unincorporated in which at least seventy percent of the
shareholders, members or persons and a majority of the
directors are persons with disability;
"public procurement" means procurement by
procuring entities using public funds;
"prescribed" means prescribed by Regulations under
this Act;
"preference" means the right or opportunity to select a
tenderer from an identified target group that is considered
more desirable than another;
"pre-qualification" means the procedure to identify
and shortlist tenderers that are qualified, prior to invitation
for tenders;
"pre-qualification procedure" means a procedure by
which candidates are invited to demonstrate their
qualifications prior to, and as a condition for, being invited
to tender or submit proposals;
"Principal Secretary" means the Principal Secretary
for the time being responsible for matters relating to
finance;
No. 33

-- 14 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
"procurement" means the acquisition by purchase,
rental, lease, hire purchase, license, tenancy, franchise, or
by any other contractual means of any type of works,
assets, services or goods including livestock or any
combination and includes advisory, planning and
processing in the supply chain system;
"procuring agent" means an organization which has
been registered by the Authority, and competitively
engaged by a procuring entity on its behalf, or an
organization established under this Act, to carry out
procurement or asset disposal activities;
"procurement contract" means an agreement
concluded between the procuring entity and a contractor (or
contractors) resulting from a tendering proceeding;
"procuring entity" means a public entity making a
procurement or asset disposal to which this Act applies;
"procurement professional" means a person who has
professional qualifications in procurement or supply chain
management from a recognised institution and is a member
of the Kenya Institute of Supplies Management established
under the Supplies Practitioners Management Act, 2007; No. 20 of 2007.
"procurement function" means a division within a
procuring entity staffed with procurement professionals
who are officially concerned with managing the
procurement and asset disposal process and reports directly
to the head of procuring entity functionally and
administratively;
"professional" means a person who has professional
qualifications in a specialized field and who is engaged in
the practice of a skill or trade, having undertaken the
relevant formal academic and professional training
including undertaking practical learning in the form of
apprenticeship or tutelage under the guidance of a suitably
qualified and experienced person in the field of training or
tutelage;
"professional body" means a body representing
members of a profession, which is regulated by statute,
code of conduct or rules as may be amended from time to
time;
" public entity" includes —

-- 15 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(a) the national government or any organ or
department of the national government;
(b) a county government or any organ or department
of a county government;
(c) the Judiciary and the courts;
(d) the Commissions established under the
Constitution;
(e) the Independent Offices established under the
Constitution;
(f) a state corporation within the meaning of the
State Corporations Act;
(g) the Central Bank of Kenya established under the
Constitution;
(h) a public school within the meaning of the Basic
Education Act, 2013;
(i) a public university within the meaning of the
Universities Act, 2012;
(j) a city or urban area established under the Urban
Areas and Cities Act, 2011;
(k) a company owned by a public entity;
(1) a county service delivery coordination unit under
the National Government Co.cadination Act,
2013;
(m) a constituency established under the Constitution;
(n) a Kenyan diplomatic mission under the state
department responsible for foreign affairs;
(o) a pension fund for a public entity;
(p) a body that uses public assets in any form of
contractual undertaking including public private
partnership;
(q) a body in which the national or county
government has controlling interest;
(r) a college or other educational institution
maintained or assisted out of public funds;
No. 33
Cap. 446.
No. 14 of 2013.
No. 42 of 2012.
No. 13 of 2011.
No.! of 2013.

-- 16 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(s) an entity prescribed as a public entity for the
purpose'of this paragraph; or
(t) any other entity or a prescribed 'class of public
entities or particular public entities that uses
public money for purposes of procurement or any
other entity as declared under sections 4 and 5 of
the Public Finance Management Act, 2012; No. 18 of 2012.
"public money" includes monetary resources
appropriated to procuring entities through the budgetary
process, as well as extra budgetary funds, including aid,
grants and loans, put at the disposal of procuring entities by
donors;
"public private partnership" has the meaning assigned
to it under section 2 of the Public Private Partnership Act,
2013;
"publicise" has the meaning assigned to it under
section 2 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012;
"registration of suppliers" means the process of
identifying and obtaining a list of prospective providers of
a specified category of goods, works or services by a
procuring entity for a specified period of time but not
exceeding more than two years, and maintaining them for
the purpose of inviting them on rotational basis for
subsequent tendering proceedings such as request for
quotations or restricted tendering, that may arise during the
period of listing;
"regulations" means regulations made under this Act;
"Review Board" means the Public Procurement
Administrative Review Board established under section 27
of this Act;
"reservations" means exclusive preference to procure
goods, works, and services set aside to a defined target
group of tenderers within a specified threshold or region;
"services" means any objects of procurement or
disposal other than works and goodg and includes
profgssional, consultancy services, technical services, non-
professional and commercial as well as
goods and works which are n13 exceeding
the value of those services;
No. 15 of 2013.
No. 18 of 2012.

-- 17 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
"standard" means characteristics or set of
characteristics for an item which for reasons of quality
level or compatibility with other products is accepted by
the manufacturers and users of that item as a required
characteristic for all items of that type;
"supplier" means a person who enters into a
procurement contract with a procuring entity to supply
goods, works or services;
"supply chain management" means the design,
planning, execution control and monitoring of supply chain
activities which includes procurement, purchasing,
logistics, transportation, warehousing, storage, stock
control, contract management and distribution, with an
objective of creating value to meet the objectives of the
procuring entity;
"tender" means an offer in writing by a candidate to
supply goods, services or works at a price; or to acquire or
dispose stores, equipment or other assets at a price,
pursuant to an invitation to tender, request for quotation or
proposal by a procuring entity;
"tenderer" means a person who submitted a tender
pursuant to an invitation by a public entity;
"tender box" means a lockable secure physical or
virtual box where tenders are submitted including by
electronic means so as to be opened only after the tender
submission deadline;
"tender security" means a guarantee required from
tenderers by the procuring entity and provided. to the
procuring entity to secure the fulfillment of any obligation
in the tender process and includes such arrangements as
bank or insurance guarantees, surety bonds, standby letters
of credit, cheques for which a bank is primarily liable, cash
deposits, promissory notes and bills of exchange tender
securing declaration, or other guarantees from institutions
as may be prescribed;
"urgent need" means the need for goods, works or
services in circumstances where there is an imminent or
actual threat to public health, welfare, safety, or of damage
to property, such that engaging in tendering proceedings or
other procurement methods would not be practicable;
No. 33

-- 18 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
"user department" means the unit of a procuring entity
that requisitions the goods, works or services being
procured;
"works" means a combination of goods and services
for the construction, repair, renovation, extension,
alteration, dismantling or demolition of buildings, roads or
other structures and includes —
(a) the designing, building, installation, testing,
commissioning and setting up of equipment and
plant;
(b) site preparation; and
(c) other incidental services;
"woman" means a person of the female gender who
has attained the age of eighteen years and includes a
company, association or body of persons, corporate or
unincorporated in which at least seventy percent of the
shareholders, members or persons and a majority of its
directors are of the female gender;
"writing" means printing, photography, facsimile,
lithography, typewriting, electronic media and any other
means of representing or reproducing words in a visible
form; and
"youth" means a person who has attained the age of
eighteen years and has not attained the age of thirty-five
years and includes a company, association or body of
persons, corporate or unincorporated in which at least
seventy percent of shareholders are persons who have
attained the age of eighteen years and have not attained the
age of thirty-five years.
3. Public procurement and asset disposal by State Guiding principles.
organs and public entities shall be guided by the following
values and principles of the Constitution and relevant
legislation—
(a) the national values and principles provided for
under Article 10;
(b) 11.1Q Qquality and freedom from discrimination
provided for under Article 27;
(c) affirmative action programmes provided for under
Articles 55 and 56;

-- 19 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
(d) principles of integrity under the Leadership and No. 19 of 2012.
Integrity Act, 2012;
(e) the principles of public finance under Article 201;
(f) the values and principles of public service as
provided for under Article 232;
(g) principles governing the procurement profession,
international norms;
(h) maximisation of value for money;
(i)promotion of local industry, sustainable
development and protection of the environment;
and
(j)promotion of citizen contractors.
4. (1) This Act applies to all State organs and public A
A
ct.
pplication of the
entities with respect to —
(a) procurement planning;
(b) procurement processing;
(c) inventory and asset management;
(d) disposal of assets; and
(e) contract management.
(2) For avoidance of doubt, the following are not
procurements or asset disposals with respect to which this
Act applies —
(a) the retaining of the services of an individual for a
limited term if, in providing those services, the
individual works primarily as though he or she
were an employee, but this shall not apply to
persons who are under a contract of service;
(b) the transfer of assets being disposed off by one
state organ or public entity to another state organ
or public entity without financial consideration;
(c) acquiring of services provided by government or
government department;
(d) acquisition and sale of shares or securities, fiscal
agency by a public entity, investments such as
shares purchased by cooperative societies, state
corporations or other public entities;

-- 20 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(e) procurement and disposal of assets under Public
Private Partnership Act, 2013; and
(f) procurement and disposal of assets under
bilateral or multilateral agreements between the
Government of Kenya and any other foreign
government, agency, entity or multilateral agency
unless as otherwise prescribed in the Regulations.
(3) For greater certainty, all public procurement are
procurements with respect to the application of this Act.
5. (1) This Act shall prevail in case of any
inconsistency between this Act and any other legislation or
government notices or circulars, in matters relating to
procurement and asset disposal except in cases where
procurement of professional services is governed by an Act
of Parliament applicable for such services.
(2) A provision of an Act that provides for a person or
body to approve any work or expenditure shall not be
construed as giving that person or body any power with
respect to the entire procurement proceedings.
6. (1) Subject to the Constitution, where any provision
of this Act conflicts with any obligations of the Republic of
Kenya arising from a treaty, agreement or other convention
ratified by Kenya and to which Kenya is party, the terms of
the treaty or agreement shall prevail.
(2) Where the Republic of Kenya is required under the
terms of any treaty or convention to which she is
party, to contribute from her resources, in any form, to
any procurement activities within Kenya, either in part
or wholly, jointly or separately, procurement through such
contributions shall be—
(a) in discrete activities where possible; and
(b) subject to the applicable provisions of this Act
(3) The disposal of any or all of the goods or public
assets accruing to Kenya as a result of procurement
activities to which subsections (1) apply shall be subject to
the provisions of this Act.
(4) Where a procurement to which subsection (1)
applies favours an external beneficiary —

No. 15 of 2013.
Conflicts with other
Acts.
Conflict with
international
agreements.

-- 21 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(a) the procurement through contributions made by
Kenya, shall be undertaken in Kenya through
contractors registered in Kenya; and
(b) all relevant insurances shall be placed with
companies registered in Kenya and goods shall be
transported in carriages registered in Kenya.
PART II— BODIES INVOLVED IN THE
REGULATION OF PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND
ASSET DISPOSAL
A. Role of the National Treasury in public procurement and
assets disposal
7. (1) The National Treasury established under section
11 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012, shall be
responsible for public procurement and asset disposal
policy formulation:
(2) In the performance of its role under subsection (1),
the National Treasury shall—
(a) formulate, evaluate, promote and research on
national and county public procurement and asset
disposal policy and standards;
(b) develop policy guidelines for the efficient
procurement management and disposal system
for national executive;
(c) design and prescribe an efficient procurement
management system for the national and county
governments to ensure transparent procurement
and asset disposal as contemplated by Article 227
of the Constitution:
Provided that the National Treasury shall
prescribe through Regulations a system under
this paragraph which operates, respects and
promotes the distinctiveness of the national and
county levels of government;
(d) provide technical assistance on procurement and
assist in the implementation and operation of the
public procurement and asset disposal system;
(e) manage and administer the scheme of service of
the procurement and supply chain management
services cadre for the national government;
No. 33
Role National
Treasury on public
procurement and
assets disposal.
No. 18 of 2012.

-- 22 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(f) carry out general research, develop and promote
electronic procurement strategies and policies in
both the national and county governments
including state corporations and other
government agencies;
(g) carry out review of procurement and supply chain
management system to assist procuring entities;
(h) develop and review policy on procurement of
common user items in the public sector both at
national and county government levels;
(i) develop policy on the administration of preference
and reservations scheme and registration of target
groups under preference and reservations scheme
as prescribed;
(j)facilitate affirmative action for disadvantaged
groups in accordance with the Constitution and
advance their participation in the procurement
process
(k) develop and review policies and guidelines on
the management of assets;
(1) issue guidelines to public entities with respect to
procurement matters; and
(m) perform such other functions as prescribed by
this Act or any other legislation.
(3) The National Treasury may prescribe an
institutional framework to provide for the procurement,
administration and management of common user items for
the national government.
B—Public Procurement Regulatory Authority
8. (1) There is established an authority to be known as
the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority which shall
be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a
common seal and shall in its corporate name, be capable
of—
(a) suing and being sued;
(b) acquiring, safeguarding, holding, charging and
disposing of moveable and immoveable
property; and
The Public
Procurement
Regulatory
Authority.

-- 23 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(c) doing or performing all such other things or acts
for the proper discharge of its functions under
this Act, which may be lawfully done by a body
corporate.
(3) The Authority may for the purposes of ensuring
access to its services in accordance with Article 6 of the
Constitution establish such offices in regional locations as
it may deem necessary for its operations.
9. (1) The functions of the Authority shall be to —
(a) monitor, assess and review the public
procurement and asset disposal system to ensure
that they respect the national values and other
provisions of the Constitution, including Article
227 and make recommendations for
improvements;
(b) monitor the public procurement system and
report on the overall functioning of it and present
to the Cabinet Secretary and the county executive
member for finance in each county, such other •
reports and recommendations for improvements;
(c) enforce any standards developed under this Act;
• (d) monitor classified procurement information,
including that of specific items of security organs
and make recommendations to the Cabinet
Secretary;
(e) monitor the implementation of the preference and
reservation schemes by procuring entities;
(f) prepare, issue and publicise standard public
procurement and asset disposal documents and
formats to be used by public entities and other
stakeholders;
(g) provide advice and technical support upon
request;
(h) to investigate and act on complaints received on
procurement and asset disposal proceedings from
procuring entities, tenderers, contractors or the
general public that are not subject of
administrative review;
No. 33
Functions of
Authority.

-- 24 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(i) research on the public procurement and asset
disposal system and any developments arising
from the same;
(j) advise the Cabinet Secretary on the setting of
standards including international public
procurement and asset disposal standards;
(k) develop and manage the State portal on
procurement and asset disposal and ensure that it
is available and easily accessible;
(1) monitor and evaluate the preference and
reservations provided for under this Act and
provide quarterly public reports;
(m) create a central repository or database that
includes—
(i) complaints made on procuring entities;
(ii) a record of those prohibited from
participating in tenders or those debarred;
(iii) market prices of goods, services and
works;
(iv) benchmarked prices;
(v) State organs and public entities that are
non-compliant with procurement laws;
(vi) statistics related to public procurement and
asset disposal;
(vii) price comparisons for goods, services and
works; and
(viii) any information related to procurement that
may be necessary for the public;
(n) inform, as applicable, the Cabinet Secretary,
Parliament, the relevant County Executive
member for finance, the relevant County
Assembly or Auditor-General on issues of non-
compliance with procurement laws once the
relevant State organ or public entity ignores the
written directives of the Authority, including
material breaches of the measures established
under this Act;

-- 25 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(o) generally report to Parliament and the relevant
county assembly;
(13) develop a code of ethics to guide procuring
entities and winning bidders when undertaking
public procurement and disposal with State
organs and public entities;
(q) in undertaking its functions, cooperate with state
and non-state actors with a view to obtaining
recommendations on how public procurement
and disposal can be improved;
(r) ensure the procurement entities implement the
preference and reservations and provide data to
the Authority disaggregated to indicate the
number of disadvantaged groups that have
benefitted;
(s) perform such other functions and duties as are
provided for under this Act and any other
relevant law.
(2) If in the course of monitoring in accordance
with section 9(1)(a), the Authority is of the opinion that
civil or criminal proceedings ought to be preferred
against a State Organ, public entity, state officer or
public officer, the Authority shall refer the matter to the
relevant authorities.
10. (1) The management of the Authority shall vest in
a board to be known as the Public Procurement Regulatory
Board which shall consist of—
(a) a chairperson nominated by the Cabinet Secretary
and appointed by the President;
(b) four members who shall be appointed by the
Cabinet Secretary after nomination, through a fair
process, by --
(i) the Law Society of Kenya;
(ii) the Institute of Certified Public
Accountants of Kenya;
(iii) the Kenya Institute of Supplies
Management;
(iv) the Association of Professional Societies
in East Africa, provided that the
No. 33
Public Procurement
Regulatory Board.

-- 26 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
appointed nominee is not a member of a
professional body under subparagraphs (i)
to (iii);
(c) two persons nominated by the respective
organizations representing-
(i)the youth; and
(ii) persons with disabilities.
(d) the Cabinet Secretary or his or her representative;
and
(e) the Attorney-General or his or her representative.
(2) In the appointment of the chairperson and
members under this section, the appointing authority shall
ensure regional balance and gender parity.
11. (1) A person shall not be appointed as a
chairperson of the Board unless that person—
(a) possesses a university degree in a relevant field
from a university recognised in Kenya;
(b) has knowledge and experience of not less than
ten years in any of the following fields-
(i) procurement and supply chain
management;
(ii) finance;
(iii) law;
(iv) accounting; or
(v) economics; and
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the
Constitution.
(2) A person shall be eligible for appointment as a
member of the Board if that person—
(a) holds a university degree from a recognized
university in Kenya;
(b) has knowledge and relevant experience of not less
than five years in a management position; and
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the
Constitution.
12. (1) The Board shall—
Qualifications of
members of the
Board.
Functions of the
Board.

-- 27 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(a) ensure the proper and effective performance of the
functions of the Authority;
(b) approve and ratify the policies of the Authority;
(c) oversee the management, control and administration
of the assets of the Authority in a manner and for
purposes that promote the object and purpose of the
Authority;
(d) receive any gifts, grants, donations or endowments
made to the Authority;
(e) determine the provisions to be made for capital and
recurrent expenditure, and for the reserves of the
Authority;
(f) open bank accounts for the funds of the Authority in
accordance with the Public Finance Management
Act, 2012;
(g) subject to the approval of the Cabinet Secretary,
invest any of the Authority funds not immediately
required for the purposes of this Act, as it may
determine; and
(h) co-operate with other organizations undertaking
functions similar to its own, whether within or
outside Kenya as it may consider appropriate and
in furtherance of the functions of the Authority;
(2) Subject to this Act, the Board may, by resolution
either generally or in any particular case, delegate
to any committee of the Board or to any member,
officer, employee or agent of the Authority, the
exercise of any of the powers, or the performance
of any of the functions or duties of the Board
under this Act.
(3) Members of the Board shall be paid allowances
determined by the Cabinet Secretary, in consultation with
the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
(4) Where the involvement of a Board member in a
decision of the Board is likely to result in conflict of
interest, the Board member shall disclose such potential
conflict of interest and the Board member shall not take
part in such decisions.
13. A member of the Board of the Authority including
No. 33
No. 18 of 2012.
Tenure of office.

-- 28 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
the chairperson shall hold office for a term of three years
but shall be eligible for re-appointment for a further term of
three years.
14. (1) The business and affairs of the Board shall be
conducted in accordance with the First Schedule.

Procedures of the
Board.
(2) Except as provided in the First Schedule, the
Board may regulate its own procedure.
(3) Five members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of any business of the Board.
(4) The Board may invite a technical person to attend
any of its meetings and to participate in its deliberations,
except where the subject is of classified nature and such an
invitee shall not have a vote in any decision of the Board.
15. (1) There shall be a Director-General of the Public
Procurement Regulatory Authority appointed by the
Cabinet Secretary on the advise of the Board.
(2) A person shall not be appointed as a Director-
General under this section unless that person —
(a) is a citizen of Kenya;
(b) has a degree in a related field of study from a
university recognised in Kenya, and can
demonstrate a logical progression in acquiring the
academic qualifications;
(c) has at least ten years' experience in senior
management position in procurement and supply
chain management; and
(d) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the
Constitution.
(3) The Director-General shall be the Chief
Executive Officer of the Authority and the Secretary to the
Board.
16. The Director-General appointed under section
15(1) shall hold office for a term of three years but shall be
eligible for re-appointment for a further term of three years.
17. (1) The Director-General shall be responsible for
the day to day management of the affairs of the Authority
and shall be answerable to the Board in the performance of
Director-General of
the 'Authority.
Term of office of
Director-General
Functions of the
Director-General.

-- 29 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
his functions under this Act.
(2) The Director-General shall perform any other
functions determined by the Board or as provided for under
this Act.
Restrictions on
activities of
Director-General
18. During the period of his or her appointment, the
Director-General shall not —
(a) be employed in any . gainful
employment work or business; or
(b) hold any other public office.
19. (1) The terms and conditions of service of the
Director-General, and the staff of the Authority shall be
determined by the Board in consultation with the Cabinet
Secretary, the Public Service Commission and the Salaries
and Remuneration Commission.
(2) The schemes of service of the Authority shall be
determined by the Board in consultation with the Cabinet
Secretary and the Public Service Commission.
20. The office of the Director-General shall become
vacant if the holder —
(a) dies; or
(b) become incapacitated on medical grounds; or
(c) resigns by a written notice of three months
addressed to the Board; or
(d) upon expiry of his or her term; or
(e) ceases to hold office under section 21 of this Act.
21. (1) The appointment of the Director-General may
be terminated only in accordance with this section.
(2) The Board may terminate a person's appointment
as the Director-General if that person —
(a) violates the Constitution or any other written
legislation; or
(b) is incompetent; or
(c) is of unsound mind; or
(d) is convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced
to a term of imprisonment exceeding six months
or a fine exceeding one million Kenya shillings;
or
(e) contravenes terms and conditions of service; or
Terms and
conditions of
service of Director-
General and staff
Vacancy of office.
Removal of
Director-General.

-- 30 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(f) is adjudged bankrupt.
(3) Where the question of the removal of the
Director-General under subsection (2) arises, the
Board shall —
(a) inform the Director-General in writing of the
reasons for the intended removal; and
(b) give the Director-General the opportunity to be
heard in accordance with the principles of fair
administrative action provided for under Article 47
of the Constitution.
22. The Board may designate a member of the staff of
the Authority to act as the Director-General during the
illness or absence of the Director-General or during a
vacancy in the office for a period not exceeding three
months within which time the Public Service Commission
will have reconstituted the Recruitment Panel to recruit
another Director-General.
23. The Board may, upon such terms and conditions of
service as it may determine, employ management staff of
the Authority as may be necessary for the proper
performance of its functions taking into account the need
for ethnic and regional balance and gender parity.
24. (1) The financial year of the Authority shall be the
period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each
year or any other day prescribed by national legislation.
(2) At least five months before the commencement of
each financial year, the Board shall cause estimates of the
revenue and expenditures of the Authority for that year to
be prepared and submitted to the Cabinet Secretary for
approval.
(3) The estimates of budget shall make provision for
all the estimated revenues and expenditures of the
Authority for the financial year and, in particular, shall
provide for —
(a) the estimates of revenues accruing to the
Authority;
(b) the payment of salaries, allowances and other
Olvargeg in respect of the staff of the Authority;
(c) the payment of pensions, gratuities and other
charges in respect of former staff of the
Authority;
Acting Director-
General.
Staff of the
Authority.
Financial
arrangements

-- 31 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(d) the proper maintenance of buildings and grounds
of the Authority;
(e) the maintenance, repair and replacement of the
equipment and other property of the Authority;
and
(f) the payment of allowances and expenses of the
Board; and
(g) capital expenditure to be undertaken by the
Authority.
(4) The Authority shall make provision for the
renewal of depreciating assets and the payment of pensions
and other retirement benefits.
(5)' The funds of the Authority shall consist of —
(a) money appropriated by Parliament for the
pbrpose of rimming the Authority;
(b) donations or graft received by the Authority for
its activities;
(c) revenue or fees ciAlected for services rendered by
the Authority; and
(d) capacity building levy of such percentage of the
procurements contract price by public entities as
may be prescribed by the Cabinet Secretary.
25. The Authority shall be audited by the office of the Audit.
Auditor-General in accordance with Articles 226(3) and
229 of the Constitution and the Public Audit Act, 2003. No. 12 of 2003.
26. (1) For each financial year, the Board shall cause Annual reports.
an annual report to be prepared.
(2) The Board shall submit to the Cabinet Secretary
the quarterly reports within thirty days after the end of the
quarter and the annual report within three months after the
end of the year to which the report relates.
(3) The reports shall contain, in respect of the period
to which they relate —
(a) a description of the activities of the Authority;
(b) a report on how the public procurement and
disposal systems are working and those that are
subject of controversy or litigation;
No. 33

-- 32 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(c) a report on the overall functioning of the public
procurement system;
(d) a report on matters under Article 227(2) of the
Constitution; and
(e) a report on the compliance with this Act by each
county government.
(4) In addition to what is required under subsection
(3), each annual report shall include the financial
statements of the Authority for the year to which the report
relates.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall, within thirty days
after receiving a report, transmit it to Parliament and the
relevant county assembly.
(6) The Board shall publish and publicize the draft
report within two weeks after the expiry of seven (7) days
upon submission to the Cabinet Secretary.
C—Public Procurement Administrative Review
Board
27. (1) There shall be a central independent
procurement appeals review board to be known as the
Public Procurement Administrative Review Board as an
unincorporated Board.
(2) The Review Board shall ensure reasonable access
to its services in all parts of the Republic, as far as it is
appropriate to do so.
28. (1) The functions of the Review Board shall be—
(a) reviewing, hearing and determining tendering and
asset disposal disputes; and
(b) to perform any other function conferred to the
Review Board by this Act, Regulations or any other
written law.
(2) In performance of its functions under subsection
(1)(a) of this section, the Review Board shall have powers
to develop rules and procedures to be gazetted by the
Cabinet Secretary.
(3) The Authority shall provide secretariat and
administrative services to the Review Board.
Establishment of the
Public Procurement
Administrative
Review Board.
Functions and
powers of the
Review Board.

-- 33 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
29. (1) The Review Board shall comprise of the
following 15 members who shall be appointed by the
Cabinet Secretary taking into account regional balance and
gender parity —
(a) a chairperson whose qualifications and
experience shall be as that of a Judge of the
High Court; and
(b) fourteen other members whose qualifications
and experience shall be as prescribed in the
regulations.
(2) A person appointed as a member under subsection
(1) shall be nominated by the following professional bodies
from amongst their members as follows—
(a) three persons nominated by the Law Society of
Kenya;
(b) one person nominated by the Chartered Institute of
Arbitrators, Kenya Chapter;
(c) three persons nominated by the Kenya Institute of
Supplies Management;
(d) three persons nominated by the Institute of Certified
Public Accountants of Kenya; and
(e) four persons nominated by the Association of
Professional Societies in East Africa, provided that
the appointed nominees are not members of
professional bodies mentioned under subparagraphs
(i) to (iv).
(3) The procedure for nominating the persons mention
under subsection (2) shall be as prescribed.
30. (1) A person shall not be appointed as a member of
the Review Board under section 29 unless that person —
(a) possesses a university degree from a university
recognised in Kenya;
(b) has knowledge and experience of not less than
seven years in the relevant field;
(c) is a professional of good standing in his or her
respective professional body; and
(d) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the
Constitution.
No. 33
Composition of the
Review Board.
Qualifications of
members of the
Review Board.

-- 34 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(2) The Chairperson appointed under this Act shall be
a person who qualifies to be a judge of the High Court and
shall meet the requirements of Chapter Six of the
Constitution.
31. (1) The Chairperson and the members of the
Review Board shall hold office for a term of three years
and shall be eligible for a further term of three years.
(2) For continuity of the Review Board's functions
and responsibilities, the appointment of the Review Board
Members shall be on a staggered period of six months.
(3) The provisions set out in the Second Schedule
shall have effect in relation to the conduct of business and
affairs of the Review Board.
32. (1) The terms and conditions of service of the
Review Board shall be determined by the Cabinet Secretary
and the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
(2) The members of the Review Board shall serve on a
part time basis.
PART Ill— COUNTY GOVERNMENT
RESPONSIBILITIES WITH RESPECT TO PUBLIC
PROCUREMENT AND ASSET DISPOSAL
33. (1) A County Treasury shall be the organ
responsible for the implementation of public procurement
and asset disposal policy in the county.
(2) Without prejudice to the general provisions of sub-
section (1), the County Treasury shall establish a
procurement function which shall —
(a) implement public procurement and asset disposal
procedures;
(b) coordinate administration of procurement and
asset disposal contracts;
(c) coordinate consultations with county
stakeholders of the public procurement and asset
disposal system in liaison with the National
Treasury and the Authority;
(d) advise the accounting officers of county
government entities on public procurement and
asset disposal matters;
(e) co-ordinate county government monitoring and
evaluation of the supply chain function of county
Tenure of office.
Tenns and
conditions of
service of the
Review Board
members.
Roles and
Responsibilities of
the County
Government.

-- 35 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
government entities including ensuring
compliance;
(f) promote preference and reservations schemes for
small and micro enterprises and other
disadvantaged groups, citizen contractors,
women, youth, persons with disabilities,
minorities and marginalized groups in public
procurement at the county;
(g) promote preference and reservation schemes for
residents of the county to ensure a minimum of
twenty percent in public procurement at the
county;
(h) administer the scheme of service for county
government procurement and supply chain
management officers and capacity building;
(3) The County Treasury may prescribe an
institutional framework to provide for the procurement,
administration and management of common user items
for the county government.
PART IV—POWERS TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE
34. A public entity shall provide the National Treasury
or the Authority with such information relating to
procurement and asset disposal as may be required in
writing.
35. (1) The Authority, may undertake investigations, Investigations.
at any reasonable time, by among other things examining
the records and accounts of the procuring entity and
contractor, supplier or consultant relating to the
procurement or disposal proceeding or contract with
respect to a procurement or disposal with respect to a State
organ or public entity for the purpose of determining
whether there has been a breach of this Act or the
Regulations made thereunder.
(2) An investigation under sub-section (1) may be
initiated by the Authority or on request in writing by a
public institution or any other person.
(3) Investigation shall be conducted by an investigator
appointed for the purpose by the Authority.
Powers to ensure
compliance.
No. 33

-- 36 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
Powers of
investigators.
Report of
investigation.
Order by the
Director-General.
36. (1) For the purpose of carrying out an
investigation of procurement or asset disposal proceedings
an investigator has the following powers —
(a) with prior notification to the procuring entity, the
investigator shall have access to all relevant
premises, books, records, returns, reports and
other documents of the procuring entity or a
person who participated in the procurement or
asset disposal proceedings, including electronic
documents;
(b) the investigator may remove or make copies of
any documents the investigator has access to
under paragraph (a);
(c) where an investigator removes a document from
the premises, the investigator shall certify a copy
of the document to be left with the procuring
entity; and
(d) the investigator may require any of the following
to provide explanations, information and
assistance-
(i) an employee or officer of the procuring
entity; or
(ii) an employee or officer of a person who
participated in the procurement or asset
disposal proceedings.
(2) In addition to the powers under subsection (1), an
investigator shall have such other powers as may be
prescribed by Regulations.
(3) The powers of an investigator are subject to such
conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by
regulations.
37. After completing his or her investigation, an
investigator shall prepare and submit a report to the
Authority.
38. (1) If, after considering the report of an
investigator, the Director-General is satisfied that there has
been a breach of this Act, the Regulations or any directions
of the Authority, the Director-General may, by order, do
any one or more of the following —

-- 37 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(a) direct the procuring entity to take such actions as
are necessary to rectify the contravention;
(b) terminate the procurement or asset disposal
proceedings;
(c) prepare and submit a summary of the
investigator's findings and recommendations to
the relevant authorities for action; or
(d) require the procuring entity to transfer procuring
responsibilities of the subject procurement to
another procuring entity.
(2) Before making an order under subsection (1), the
Director-General shall give the following persons an
opportunity to make representations --
(a) the procuring entity; and
(b) any other person whose legal rights the Director-
General believes may be adversely affected by
the order.
39. The procuring entity and any other person who
was entitled to be given an opportunity to make
representations under section 38 (2) may request for
Judicial Review against an order of the Board to the High
Court within fourteen days after the order is made.
40. (1) No investigation shall be commenced or
continued under this Part, and no order shall be made under
this Part, in relation to an issue that the Review Board is
reviewing or has reviewed under the relevant provisions of
this Act.
(2) Subsection (1) ceases to apply if, after the Review
Board has completed its review, information comes to the
attention of the Board that was not brought before the
Review Board in the course of its review.
41. (1) The Board shall debar a person from
participating in procurement or asset disposal proceedings
on the ground that the person —
(a) has committed an offence under this Act;
(b) has committed an offence relating to procurement
under any other Act or Law of Kenya or any
other jurisdiction;
No. 33
Request for a
Judicial review.
No investigation if
issue before Review
Board.
Debarment.

-- 38 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(c) has breached a contract for a procurement by a
public entity including poor performance;
(d) has, in procurement or asset disposal
proceedings, given false information about his or
her qualifications;
(e) has refused to enter into a written contract as
required under section 135 of this Act;
(f) has breached a code of ethics issued by the
Authority pursuant to section 181 of this Act or
the code of ethics of the relevant profession
regulated by an Act of Parliament;
(g) has defaulted on his or her tax obligations;
(h) is guilty of corrupt or fraudulent practices; or
(i) is guilty of a serious violation of fair employment
laws and practices.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1)
the Board may debar a person from participating in any
procurement process if that person—
(a) has breached the requirements of the tender
securing declaration form in the tender
documents; or
(b) has not performed according to professionally
regulated procedures.
(3) The Authority, may also debar a person from
participating in procurement or asset disposal
proceedings —
(a) on the recommendation of a law enforcement
organ with an investigative mandate;
(b) on grounds prescribed by the Authority in
Regulations.
(4) A debarment under this section shall be for a
specified period of time of not less than three years.
(5) The procedure for debarment shall be prescribed
by Regulations.
42. A party to the debarment may seek Judicial Judicial Review.
Review from the decision of the Authority to the High
Court within fourteen days after the decision is made.

-- 39 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
43. (1) The. Authority, or anyone authorised by the
Authority, may inspect, assess, review or audit at any
reasonable time, the records and accounts of the procuring
entity and contractor relating to the procurement or
disposal proceeding or contract and the procuring entity
and contractor or tenderer shall co-operate with and assist
whoever does such an inspection.
(2) The Authority shall conduct procurement audits
during the tender preparation, contract audit in the course
of execution of an awarded tender; and performance audit
after the completion of the contract in respect of any
procurement or asset disposal as may be required.
(3) The inspector shall have access to all relevant
books, records, returns, reports and other documents of the
procuring entity or a person who participated in the
procurement or asset disposal proceedings, including
electronic documents.
(4) The inspector may remove or make copies of any
documents he or she has access to.
(5) Where an inspector removes a document from the
promises, the inspector shall certify a copy of the document
to be left with the procuring entity;
(6) The inspector may require any of the following to
provide explanations, information and assistance —
(a) an employee or officer of the procuring entity; or
(b) an employee or a person who participated in the
procurement or asset disposal proceedings.
(7) Subject to prescribed conditions and limitations, an
inspector shall have additional powers as may be
prescribed.
(8) Where contraventions are discovered in the course
of an inspection, the Authority may direct the procuring
entity to take such actions as are necessary to rectify the
contravention.
PART V —INTERNAL ORGANISATION OF
PROCURING ENTITIES
44. (1) An accounting officer of a public entity shall
be primarily responsible for ensuring that the public entity
complies with the Act.
No, 33
Inspections,
Assessments and
Reviews relating to
contracts,
procurement and
asset disposal
proceedings.
Responsibilities of
the accounting
officer.

-- 40 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(2) In the performance of the responsibility under
subsection (1), an accounting officer shall—
(a) ensure that procurements of goods, works and
services of the public entity are within approved
budget of that entity;
(b) constitute all procurement and asset disposal
committees within a procuring entity in
accordance with the Act;
(c) ensure procurement plans are prepared in
conformity with the medium term fiscal
framework and fiscal policy objectives and,
subject to subsection (3), submit them to the
National Treasury;
(d) ensure proper documentation of procurement
proceedings and safe custody of all procurement
records in accordance with the Act;
(e) ensure compliance with sections 68, 147, 148
and 149 of the Public Finance Management Act, No. 18 of 2012.
2012;
(f) approve and sign all contracts of the procuring
entity;
(g) ensure the procurement and asset disposal
process of the public entity shall comply with this
Act;
(h) ensure that the procurement processes are
handled by different professional offices in
respect of procurements, initiation, processing
and receipt of goods, works and services;
(i)submit to the Authority the part in its procurement
plan demonstrating application of preference and
reservations schemes in relation to the
procurement budget within sixty days after
commencement of the financial year; and
(j) ensure compliance with any other responsibilities
assigned by this Act or any other Act of
Parliament or as may be prescribed in
Regulations.
(3) The procurement plans prepared by the national
security organs shall be exempted from submission to the
National Treasury.

-- 41 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(4) An accounting officer involved in a procurement
transaction on exploitation of natural resources shall
comply with provisions of Article 71 of the Constitution
and any other written law.
45. (1) For the purpose of ensuring that the accounting
officer's decisions are made' in a systematic and structured
way, an accounting officer shall establish systems and
procedures to facilitate decision making for procurement
and asset disposal.
(2) The procedures required under subsection (1),
shall be consistent with this Act and the Regulations.
(3) All procurement processes shall be —
(a) within the approved budget of the procuring
entity and shall be planned by the procuring
entity concerned through an annual procurement
plan;
(b) undertaken by a procuring entity as per the
threshold matrix prescribed; and
(c) undertaken in strict adherence to Article 227 of
the Constitution.
(4) All asset disposal processes shall be handled by
different persons in respect of identification, consolidation,
preparation of a disposal plan, pricing and the disposal
itself.
(5) For the avoidance of doubt, all public officers or
State officers involved in procurement or asset disposal
processes shall bear responsibility for their actions and
omissions.
46. (1) An Accounting officer shall ensure that an ad
hoc evaluation committee is established in accordance with
this Mt and Regulations made thereunder and from within
the members of staff, with the relevant expertise.
(2) In establishing the ad hoc evaluation committee
referred to in subsection (1) above, the procuring entity that
is a State Department or a County Department, shall do so
in consultation with the Cabinet Secretary or the County
Executive Committee member responsible for that entity,
as the case may be.
(3) Despite subsection (1), where technical expertise is
required from outside the organisation, such expertise may
be obtained from other procuring entities or procured to
No. 33
Corporate decisions
and segregation of
responsibilities.
Evaluation
Committee.

-- 42 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
join the committee, on recommendation, in writing, by the
head of the procurement function, and the committee shall
be appointed by the accounting officer, in writing.
(4) An evaluation committee established under
subsection (1), shall —
(a) deal with the technical and financial aspects of a
procurement as well as the negotiation of the
process including evaluation of bids, proposals
for prequalification, registration lists, Expression
of Interest and any other roles assigned to it;
(b) consist of between three and five members
appointed on a rotational basis comprising heads
of user department and two other departments or
their representatives and where necessary,
procured consultants or professionals, who shall
advise on the evaluation of the tender documents
and give a recommendation on the same to the
committee within a reasonable time;
(c) have as its secretary, the person in charge of the
procurement function;
(d) complete the procurement process for which it
was appointed and no new committee shall be
appointed on the same issue unless the one
handling the issue has been procedurally
disbanded;
(e) adopt a process that shall ensure the evaluation
process utilized adheres to Articles 201(d) and
227 (1) of the Constitution.
(5) For greater certainty a procuring entity shall where
a member of the ad hoc evaluation committee contravenes
any provisions of this Act, institute disciplinary measures
in accordance with the procuring entity's disciplinary
measures and the provisions of this Act.
(6) Where a public entity lacks capacity to comply
with this Act an accounting officer shall seek assistance
from the National Treasury.
(7) Subject to this Act, the evaluation committee may
invite external technical experts who are not employees of
the organisation to assist in matters that need specific
technical expertise.

-- 43 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(8) Notwithstanding the provisions in this section, the
Cabinet Secretary may prescribe other procedures for
evaluating low value procurements below specified
thresholds.
47. (1) A procurement function shall be handled by
procurement professionals whose qualifications are
recognized in Kenya.
(2) The head of the procurement function shall among
other functions under this Act, be responsible for rendering
procurement professional advice to the accounting officer.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall make regulations for
the better carrying out of this section in respect to low
value procurement.
48. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
may establish an ad hoc committee known as the inspection
and acceptance committee.
(2) The inspection and acceptance committee shall be
composed of a chairman and at least two other members
appointed by the accounting officer or the head of the
procuring entity on the recommendation of the procuring
unit.
(3) The inspection and acceptance committee shall
immediately after the delivery of the goods, works or
services—
(a) inspect and where necessary ,test the goods
received;
(b) inspect and review the goods ,works or
services in order to ensure compliance with
the terms and specifications of the contract;
and
(c) accept or reject , on behalf of the procuring
entity , the delivered goods, works or
services.
(4)The inspection and acceptance committee shall—
(a) ensure that the correct quantity of the goods is
received;
(b) ensure that the goods, works or services meet the
technical standards defined in the contract;
No. 33
Procurement
function.
Inspection and
acceptance
committee.

-- 44 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(c) ensure that the goods, works or services have
been delivered or completed on time ,or that any
delay has been noted;
(d) ensure that all required manuals or documentation
has been received; and
(e) issue interim or completion certificates or
goods received notes, as appropriate and in
accordance with the contract.
49. A procuring entity or procuring entities with
common interest may establish a procuring agency at
national or county level for the purpose of procurement and
distribution of sector-specific goods, works and services on
behalf of procuring entities within the respective sector and
shall be in accordance with this Act and the regulations
made thereunder.
50. (1) A procuring entity or procuring entities with
common interest may enter into consortium buying for the
purpose of procuring jointly in order to benefit from
economies of scale.
(2) Any procurement or disposal undertaken pursuant
to subsections (1) of this section shall be subject to this
Act.
51. (1) A procuring entity may procure and appoint a
procuring or asset disposal agent, as per this Act, including
on a competitive basis to carry out such procurement or
asset disposal on its behalf as per the terms of the contract.
(2) A procuring entity may not appoint a procuring or
asset disposal agent unless that procuring entity —
(a) demonstrates lack of internal capacity;
(b) provides evidence of inability to establish a
procurement and disposal unit; or
(c) demonstrates the inability to use the services of
other State organs or public entities.
(3) The appointment of a procuring or asset disposal
agent under subsection (2) shall be done only from amongst
a list of agents registered and licensed by the Authority.
(4) A procuring entity shall, within fourteen days after
the appointment of the agent, publicise the following
Procuring agents or
asset disposal
agents.
Sector-specific
procuring and
disposal agencies.
Consortium
buying.

-- 45 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
details on its website-
(a) Name and address of the agent;
(b) value of the contract;
(c) items and value of items to be procured or
disposed by the agent;
(d) duration of the contract; and
(e) method of procuring the agent.
(5) A state organ or public entity shall not appoint
more than one agent for the same transaction.
(6) A state organ or public entity shall give
preferential treatment to the local agents before seeking the
services of an international procurement agent.
(7) For the preference for local agents, all the work
shall be handled by agents of same region in question, and
where an international agent has been procured, all
functions that will be sublet and can be performed by
citizens shall be sublet to persons who are citizens.
(8) A Procuring or disposal agent shall comply with
the provisions of this Act.
52. (1) The Authority shall have power to transfer the
procuring responsibility of a procuring entity to another
procuring entity or procuring agent in the event of delay or
in such other circumstances as may be prescribed.
(2) Subject to the approval of the governing body of
the organ or entity, where applicable or upon
recommendation of the Authority, an accounting officer
shall make arrangements to enable another procuring entity
to carry out the procurement or part of the procurement, on
behalf of a procuring entity, in accordance with this Act.
(3) A procuring entity may use the register list of
another State organ or public entity whenever the procuring
entity's list does not suffice.
(4) The procuring entity shall obtain the whole list of
relevant category from the State organ or entity, and
together with its own relevant list, subject the list to this
Act.
Transfer of
procuring
responsibility to
another public
entity or procuring
agent.

-- 46 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
PART VI —GENERAL PROCUREMENT AND
ASSET DISPOSAL PRINCIPLES
53. (1) All procurement by State organs and public
entities are subject to the rules and principles of this Act.
(2) An accounting officer shall prepare an annual
procurement plan which is realistic in a format set out in
the Regulations within the approved budget prior to
commencement of each financial year as part of the annual
budget preparation process.
(3) Any public officer who knowingly recommends to
the accounting officer excessive procurement of items
beyond a reasonable consumption of the procuring entity
commits an offence under this Act.
(4) All asset disposals shall be planned by the
accounting officer concerned through annual asset disposal
plan in a format set out in the Regulations.
(5) A procurement and asset disposal planning shall be
based on indicative or approved budgets which shall be
integrated with applicable budget processes and in the case
of a State Department or County Department, such plans
shall be approved by the Cabinet Secretary or the County
Executive Committee member responsible for that entity.
(6) All procurement and asset disposal planning shall
reserve a minimum of thirty per cent of the budgetary
allocations for enterprises owned by women, youth,
persons with disabilities and other disadvantaged groups.
(7) Multi-year procurement plans may be prepared in
a format set out in the Regulations and shall be consistent
with the medium term budgetary expenditure framework
for projects or contracts that go beyond one year.
(8) Accounting officer shall not commence any
procurement proceeding until satisfied that sufficient funds
to meet the obligations of the resulting contract are
reflected in its approved budget estimates.
(9) An accounting officer who knowingly commences
any procurement process without ascertaining whether the
good, work or service is budgeted for, commits an offence
under this Act.
Procurement and
asset disposal
planning.

-- 47 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(10) For greater certainty, the procurement and
disposal plans approved under subsection (5) shall include
choice of procurement and disposal methods and certain
percentages referred to under subsection (6).
(11) Any state or public officer who fails to prepare
procurement and disposal plans shall be subject to internal
disciplinary action.
54. (1) No procuring entity may structure procurement
as two or more procurements for the purpose of avoiding
the use of a procurement procedure except where
prescribed.
(2) Standard goods, services and works with known
market prices shall be procured at the prevailing market
price.
(3) The Authority shall issue a quarterly market price
index as reference guide to assist accounting officers make
informed price decisions.
(4) Public officers involved in transactions in which
standard goods, services and works are procured at
unreasonably inflated prices shall, in addition to any other
sanctions prescribed in this Act or the Regulations made
thereunder, be required to pay the procuring entity for the
loss resulting from their actions.
55. (1) A person is eligible to bid for a contract in
procurement or an asset being disposed, only if the person
satisfies the following criteria —
(a) the person has the legal capacity to enter into a
contract for procurement or asset disposal;
(b) the person is not insolvent, in receivership,
bankrupt or in the process of being wound up;
(c) the person, if a member of a regulated profession,
has satisfied all the professional requirements;
(d) the procuring entity is not precluded from
entering into the contract with the person under
section 38 of this Act;
(e) the person and his or her sub-contractor, if any, is
not debarred from participating in procurement
proceedings under Part XI of this Act;
No. 33
Procurement pricing
and requirement not
to split of contracts.
Eligibility to bid.

-- 48 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(f) the person has fulfilled tax obligations;
(g) the person has not been convicted of corrupt or
fraudulent practices; and
(h) is not guilty of any serious violation of fair
employment laws and practices.
(2) A person or consortium shall be considered
ineligible to bid, where in case of a corporation, private
company, partnership or other body, the person or
consortium, their spouse, child or sub-contractor has
substantial or controlling interest and is found to be in
contravention of the provisions of subsection (1) (e), (f),
(g) and (h).
(3) Despite the provisions of subsection (2), a person
or other body having a substantial or controlling interest
shall be eligible to bid where—
(a) such person has declared any conflict of
interest; and
(b) performance and price competition for that
good, work or service is not available or can
only be sourced from that person or
consortium.
(4) A State organ or public entity shall require a
person to provide evidence or information to establish that
the criteria under subsection (1) are satisfied.
(5) A State organ or public entity shall consider as
ineligible a person for submitting false, inaccurate or
incomplete information about his or her qualifications.
56. (1) To identify qualified persons, a State organ or
public entity may seek, in writing, to use another State
organ's, public entity's or regulated professional body's
registration list of all registered persons in the category,
provided that the list is valid and developed through a
competitive process in accordance with the relevant
provisions of this Act or, in the case of regulated
professional bodies, developed through a process in
accordance with relevant provisions of the legislation
regulating the particular profession.
(2) The State organ or public entity shall then subject
the list, together with its own, where applicable, to the
procedures in this Act.
Use of list of
another state organ
or public entity.

-- 49 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
57. (1) The head of the procurement function of a
procuring entity shall maintain and update lists of
registered suppliers, contractors and consultants in the
categories of goods, works or services according to its
procurement needs.
(2) Submission of names shall be continuous and the
registration list shall be updated periodically as prescribed
in Regulations and in accordance with this Act.
58. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
shall use standard procurement and asset disposal
documents issued by the Authority in all procurement and
asset disposal proceedings.
(2) The tender documents used by a procuring entity
under subsection (1) shall contain sufficient information to
allow fairness, equitability, transparency, cost-effectiveness
and competition among those who may wish to submit their
applications.
59. (1) A State Organ or public entity shall not enter
into a contract for a procurement with—
(a) a public officer or state officer or a member of a
committee or Board of that State organ or public
entity; or
(b) an officer of that public entity or state organ.
(2) A State officer or a public officer shall not award
or influence the award of a contract to —
(a) himself or herself;
(b) the State officer's or public officer's spouse or
child;
(c) a business associate or agent; or
(d) a corporation, private company, partnership or
other body in which the officer has a substantial
or controlling interest.
(3) A state officer or public officer who has an interest
in a matter under consideration in a public procurement or
asset disposal shall disclose in writing, the nature of that
interest and shall not participate in any procurement or
asset disposal relating to that interest.
60. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
shall prepare specific requirements relating to the goods,
No. 33
List of registered
suppliers.
Standard
procurement and
asset disposal
documents.
Limitation on
contracts with state
and public officers.
Specific
requirements.

-- 50 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
works or services being procured that are clear, that give a
correct and complete description of what is to be procured
and that allow for fair and open competition among those
who may wish to participate in the procurement
proceedings.
(2) The specific requirements shall include all the
procuring entity's technical requirements with respect to
the goods, works or services being procured.
(3) The technical requirements shall, where
appropriate —
(a) conform to design, specification, functionality
and performance;
(b) be based on national or international standards
whichever is superior;
(c) factor in the life of the item;
(d) factor in the socio-economic impact of the item;
(e) be environment-friendly;
(f) factor in the cost disposing the item; and
(g) factor in the cost of servicing and maintaining the
item.
(4) The technical requirements shall not refer to a
particular trademark, name, patent, design, type, producer
or service provider or to a specific origin unless —
(a) there is no other sufficiently precise or
intelligible way of describing the requirements;
and
(b) the requirements allow equivalents to what is
referred to.
61. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity Tender security.
may require that tender security be provided with tenders,
subject to such requirements or limits as may be prescribed.
(2) The form of tender security in subsection (1) shall
be —
(a) as prescribed in the Regulations;
(b) stated as an absolute value;
(c) an amount of not more than two percent of the
tender as valued by the procuring entity.

-- 51 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(3) Tender security shall be forfeited if the person
submitting the tender —
(a) withdraws the tender after the deadline for
submitting tenders but before the expiry of the
period during which tenders shall remain valid;
or
(b) refuses to enter into a written contract as required
under section 136 or fails to furnish any required
performance security.
(4) A procuring entity may immediately release any
tender security if—
(a) the procurement proceedings are terminated;
(b) the procuring entity determines that none of the
submitted tenders is responsive;
(c) a contract for the procurement is entered into; or
(d) a bidder declines to extend the tender validity.
(5) Tender securities shall not be required in
procurements reserved for small and micro-enterprises or
enterprises owned by women, youth, persons with
disabilities and other disadvantaged groups participating in
'a procurement proceeding and the target group shall be
required to fill and sign the Tender Securing Declaration
Form as prescribed.
62. A tender, proposal or quotation submitted by a
person shall include a declaration that the person will not
engage in any corrupt or fraudulent practice and a
declaration that the person or his or her sub-contractors are
not debarred from participating in procurement
proceedings.
63. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity,
may, at any time, prior to notification of tender award,
terminate or cancel procurement or asset disposal
proceedings without entering into a contract where any of
the following applies —
(a) the subject procurement have been overtaken
by —
(i) operation of law; or
(ii) substantial technological change.
No. 33
Declaration not to
engage in
corruption.
Termination or
cancellation of
procurement and
asset disposal
proceedings.

-- 52 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(b) inadequate budgetary provision;
(c) no tender was received;
(d) there is evidence that prices of the bids are above
market prices;
(e) material governance issues have been detected;
(f) all evaluated tenders are non-responsive;
(g) force majeure;
(h) civil commotion, hostilities or an act of war; or
(i) upon receiving subsequent evidence of
engagement in fraudulent or corrupt practices by
the tenderer.
(2) An accounting officer who terminates procurement
or asset disposal proceedings shall give the Authority a
written report on the termination within fourteen days.
(3) A report under subsection (2) shall include the
reasons for the termination.
(4) An accounting officer shall notify all persons who
submitted tenders of the termination within fourteen days
of termination and such notice shall contain the reason for
termination.
64. (1) All communications and enquiries between
parties on procurement and asset disposal proceedings shall
be in writing.
(2) Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT) may be used in procurement and asset disposal
proceedings as prescribed with respect to —
(a) publication of notices;
(b) submission and opening of tenders;
(c) tender evaluation;
(d) requesting for information on the tender or
disposal process;
(e) dissemination of laws, regulations and directives;
(0 digital signatures; or
(g) as may be prescribed by regulations.
Form of
communications,
electronic
procurement and
asset disposal.

-- 53 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
65. (1) After the deadline for the submission of
tenders, proposals or quotations —
(a) a person who submitted a tender shall not make
any unsolicited communications to the procuring
entity or any person involved in the procurement
proceedings that might reasonably be construed
as an attempt to influence the evaluation and
comparison of tenders; and
(b) a person shall not attempt, in any way, to
influence that evaluation and comparison
(2) A person who contravenes the provisions of
subsection (1) commits an offence and shall lead to the
tenderer being disqualified and the public officer facing
disciplinary action in addition to any other action under this
Act.
(3) Upon completion of the evaluation process, a
tenderer may communicate with the procuring entity on the
procurement proceedings.
66. (1) A person to whom this Act applies shall not be
involved in any corrupt, coercive, obstructive, collusive or
fraudulent practice; or conflicts of interest in any
procurement or asset disposal proceeding.
(2) A person referred to under subsection (1) who
contravenes the provisions of that sub-section commits an
offence.
(3) Without limiting the generality of the subsection
(1) and (2) , the person shall be—
(a) disqualified from entering into a contract for a
procurement or asset disposal proceeding; or
(b) if a contract has already been entered into with
the person, the contract shall be voidable.
(4) The voiding of a contract by the procuring entity
under subsection (7) does not limit any legal remedy the
procuring entity may have.
(5) An employee or agent of the procuring entity or a
member of the Board or committee of the procuring entity
who has a conflict of interest with respect to a
procurement —
No. 33
Inappropriate
influence on
evaluations, etc.
Corrupt, coercive,
obstructive,
collusive or
fraudulent practice,
conflicts of interest.

-- 54 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(a) shall not take part in the procurement
proceedings;
(b) shall not, after a procurement contract has been
entered into, take part in any decision relating to
the procurement or contract; and
(c) shall not be a subcontractor for the bidder to
whom was awarded contract, or a member of the
group of bidders to whom the contract was
awarded, but the subcontractor appointed shall
meet all the requirements of this Act.
(6) An employee, agent or member described in
subsection (1) who refrains from doing anything prohibited
under that subsection, but for that subsection, would have
been within his or her duties shall disclose the conflict of
interest to the procuring entity.
(7) If a person contravenes subsection (1) with respect
to a conflict of interest described in subsection (5)(a) and
the contract is awarded to the person or his relative or to
another person in whom one of them had a direct or
indirect pecuniary interest, the contract shall be terminated
and all costs incurred by the public entity shall be made
good by the awarding officer.
(8) For the purpose of this section, a person has a
conflict of interest with respect to a procurement if the
person or a relative of the person —
(a) seeks, or has a direct or indirect pecuniary
interest in another person who seeks, a contract
for the procurement; or
(b) owns or has a right in any property or has a direct
or indirect pecuniary interest that results in the
private interest of the person conflicting with his
duties with respect to the procurement.
(9) The ownership of, or right in, any property referred
to in subsection (8)(b) shall not include rights arising by
virtue of owning shares in publicly listed companies.
(10) For the purpose of subsection (8), the following
are persons seeking a contract for a procurement —
(a) a person submitting a tender, proposal or
quotation; or

-- 55 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(b) if direct procurement is being used, a person with
whom the procuring entity is negotiating.
(11) In this section, "relative" means —
(a) a spouse, child, parent, brother or sister;
(b) a child, parent, brother or sister of a spouse; or
(c) any other prescribed persons.
(12) Any person who contravenes the provisions of
this section commits an offence.
67. (1) During or after procurement proceedings and
subject to subsection (3), no procuring entity and no
employee or agent of the procuring entity or member of a
board, commission or committee of the procuring entity
shall disclose the following —
(a) information relating to a procurement whose
disclosure would impede law enforcement or
whose disclosure would not be in the public
interest;
(b) information relating to a procurement whose
disclosure would prejudice legitimate
commercial interests, intellectual property rights
or inhibit fair competition;
(c) information relating to the evaluation,
comparison or clarification of tenders, proposals
or quotations; or
(d) the contents of tenders, proposals or quotations.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) an employee or
agent or member of a board, commission or committee of
the procuring entity shall sign a confidentiality declaration
form as prescribed.
(3) This section does not prevent the disclosure of
information if any of the following apply —
(a) the disclosure is to an authorized employee or
agent of the procuring entity or a member of a
board or committee of the procuring entity
involved in the procurement proceedings;
(b) the disclosure is for the purpose of law
enforcement;
No. 33
Confidentiality.

-- 56 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(c) the disclosure is for the purpose of a review
under Part XV or requirements under Part IV of
this Act;
(d) the disclosure is pursuant to a court order; or
(e) the disclosure is made to the Authority or Review
Board under this Act
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (3),
the disclosure to an applicant seeking a review under Part
XV shall constitute only the summary referred to in section
67 (2)(d)(iii).
(5) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this
section commits an offence as stipulated in section
177(1)(f) and shall be debarred and prohibited to work for a
government entity or where the government holds shares,
for a period of ten years.
68. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
shall keep records for each procurement for at least six
years after the resulting contract has been completed or, if
no contract resulted, after the procurement proceedings
were terminated.
(2) The records for a procurement shall include —
(a) a brief description of the goods, works or services
being procured;
(b) if a procedure other than open tendering was
used, the reasons for doing so;
(c) if, as part of the procurement procedure, anything
was advertised in a newspaper or other
publication, a copy of that advertisement as it
appeared in that newspaper or publication;
(d) for each tender, proposal or quotation that was
submitted —
(i) the name and address of the person making
the submission;
(ii) the price, or basis of determining the price,
and a summary of the other principal terms
and conditions of the tender, proposal or
quotation; and
Procurement
records.

-- 57 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(iii) a summary of the proceedings of the
opening of tenders, evaluation and
comparison of the tenders, proposals or
quotations, including the evaluation criteria
used as prescribed;
(e) if the procurement proceedings were terminated
without resulting in a contract, an explanation of
why they were terminated;
(f) a copy of every document that this Act requires
the procuring entity to prepare; and
(g) such other information or documents as are
prescribed.
(3) After a contract has been awarded to any person or
the procurement proceedings have been terminated, the
procuring entity shall, on request, make the records for the
procurement available to a person who submitted a tender,
proposal or quotation, or any interested member of the
public where such information held is aligned to the
principle of public interest or, if direct procurement was
used, a person with whom the procuring entity was
negotiating.
(4) The accounting officer of a procuring entity may
charge a fee for making the records available but the fee
shall not exceed the costs of making the records available
to any person.
(5) No disclosure shall be made under subsection (3)
that would be contrary to section 67(1), but a disclosure,
under subsection (3), of anything described in paragraphs
(a) to (f) of subsection (2) shall be deemed not to be
contrary to paragraphs (b) to (d) of section 67(1).
(6) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
maintain a proper filing system with clear links between
procurement and expenditure files that facilitates an audit
trail.
69. (1) All approvals relating to any procedures in
procurement shall be in writing and properly dated,
documented and filed.
(2) No procurement approval shall be made to operate
retrospectively to any date earlier than the date on which it
is made except on procurements in response to an urgent
need.
No. 33
Procurement
approvals.

-- 58 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(3) In approving procurements relating to an urgent
need, the accounting officer shall be furnished with
adequate evidence to verify the emergency.
(4) No procurement approval shall be made by a
person exercising delegated authority as an accounting
officer or head of the procurement function unless such
delegation has been approved in writing by the accounting
officer or the head of the procurement unit, respectively.
(5) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
maintain specimen signatures of all persons authorised to
make approvals within the procurement process and these
signatures shall be availed to all staff and members where
applicable.
(6) Responsibility for each approval made in the
procurement procedure shall rest with the individual
signatories and accounting officer, whether he or she
delegated the authority or not.
PART VII —BASIC PROCUREMENT RULES
70. (1) The Authority shall issue standard procurement
and asset disposal documents and formats as prescribed for
use by procuring entities.
(2) A procuring entity shall use standard procurement
and asset disposal documents prescribed under subsection
(1), in all procurement and asset disposal proceedings.
(3) The tender documents used by a procuring entity
pursuant to subsection (2) shall contain sufficient
information to allow fair competition among those who
may wish to submit tenders.
(4) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall be
responsible for preparation of tender documents in
consultation with the user and other relevant departments.
(5) A procuring entity may charge a fee for obtaining
tender documents as prescribed by regulations and stated in
the tender documents.
(6) The tender documents shall set out the
following —
(a) the specific requirements prepared under section
60 relating to the goods, works or services being
procured and the time limit for delivery or
completion;
Standard tender
documents.

-- 59 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(b) if works are being procured, relevant drawings
and bills of quantities shall be disclosed and the
projects total estimated cost evaluated only on the
basis of criteria disclosed, but a person shall not
be disqualified on the basis that a bidder quoted
above or below a certain percentage of engineer's
estimates;
(c) the general and specific conditions to which the
contract will be subject, including any
requirement that performance security be
provided before the contract is entered into;
(d) the tender number assigned to the procurement
proceedings by the procuring entity;
(e) instructions for the preparation and submission of
tenders including —
(i) the forms for tenders;
(ii) the number of copies to be submitted with
the original tender;
(iii) any requirement that tender security be
provided and the form and amount of any
such security;
(iv) any requirement that evidence be provided
of the qualifications of the person
submitting the tender;
(v) the procuring entity facilitation and the
submission of tender documents by the
tenderer through either soft or hard copy,
but it will be the onus of the tenderer to
ensure the adequate submission of said
documents;
(vi) the procurement function ensuring that where
necessary, the preferences and reservations
of the tender are clearly spelt out in the
bidding documents.
(f) an explanation of where and when tenders shall
be submitted, a statement that the tenders will be
opened immediately after the deadline for
submitting them and an explanation of where the
tenders will be opened;
No. 33

-- 60 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
a statement that those submitting tenders or their
representatives may attend the opening of
tenders;
(h) a statement of the period during which tenders
must remain valid;
the procedures and criteria to be used to evaluate
and compare the tenders;
(j) a statement that the accounting officer of a
procuring entity may, at any time terminate the
procurement proceedings without entering into a
contract in accordance with section 60 of the Act;
(k) a provision for providing details of sub-
contractors for the bidder, where applicable, and
a declaration that the sub-contractors have
complied with this Act; and
(1) anything else required, under this Act or the
regulations, to be set out in the tender documents.
71. (1) The head of procurement function shall
maintain and continuously update lists of registered
suppliers, contractors and consultants in various specific
categories of goods, works or services according to its
procurement needs.
(2) An application to be included in the list of the
procuring entity may be made at anytime, at no cost and
shall contain proof of the following —
(a) eligibility criteria as prescribed in this Act; and
(b) capability criteria that defines necessary
qualifications, experience, resources, equipment
and facilities to provide what is being procured;
(3) A tenderer may seek clarification from the
candidate or relevant government agency on eligibility but
not on capability.
(4) The lists shall be applied on the alternative
procurement methods as specified and appropriate and the
list shall —
(a) N generated through portal, websites and people
submitting hard copies of their intention to
supply;
(g)
(i)
Registration of
suppliers.

-- 61 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(b) allow for continuous applications and hence
updating;
(c) be evaluated leading to registration on a bi-
annual basis;
(d) be generated through market knowledge and
survey; and
(e) be as may be prescribed.
72. Contractors, suppliers and consultants shall
comply with the provisions of this Act and the Regulations.
73. Subject to the procurement planning, initiation of
the procurement process shall be as prescribed in the
Regulations.
74. (1) The accounting officer shall ensure the
preparation of an invitation to tender that sets out the
following —
(a) the name and address of the procuring entity;
(b)
(c)
(0
the tender number assigned to the procurement
proceedings by the procuring entity;
a brief description of the goods, works or services
being procured including the time limit for
delivery or completion;
an explanation of how to obtain the tender
documents, including the amount of any fee, if
any;
an explanation of where and when tenders shall
be submitted and where and when the tenders
shall be opened;
a statement that those submitting tenders or their
representatives may attend the opening of
tenders;
applicable preferences and reservations pursuant
to this Act;
a declaration that the tender is only open to those
who meet the requirements for eligibility;
requirement of serialisation of pages by the
bidder for each bid submitted; and
No. 33
Responsibility for
complying with
Act, etc.
Initiation of
procurement
process.
Invitation to tender.

-- 62 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(j) any other requirement as may be prescribed.
(2) All tender documents shall be sent out to eligible
bidders by recorded delivery.
75. (1) A procuring entity may amend the tender
documents at any time before the deadline for submitting
tenders by issuing an addendum without materially altering
the substance of the original tender.
(2) An amendment may be made on the procuring
entity's own initiative or in response to an inquiry by a
candidate or tenderer.
(3) A procuring entity shall promptly provide a copy
of the addendum to each person to whom the procuring
entity provided copies of the tender documents.
(4) The addendum shall be deemed to be part of the
tender documents.
(5) If the tender documents are amended when the
time remaining before the deadline for submitting tenders
is less than one third of the time allowed for the preparation
of tenders, or the time remaining is less than the period
indicated in instructions to tenderers, the accounting officer
of a procuring entity shall extend the deadline as necessary
to allow the amendment of the tender documents to be
taken into account in the preparation or amendment of
tenders.
76. (1) Before the deadline for submitting tenders, a
person who submitted a tender may only change or
withdraw it in accordance with the following —
(a) the change or withdrawal shall be in writing; and
(b) the change or withdrawal shall be submitted
before the deadline for submitting tenders and in
accordance with the procedures for submitting
tenders.
(2) After the deadline for submitting tenders, a person
who submitted a tender shall not change, or offer to change
the terms of that tender.
77. (1) Submission of tender documents whether in
electronic or manual form, shall be in writing, signed and
in the case of manual submission, they shall be sealed in an
envelope.
Modification of
bids.
Submission and
receipt of tenders.
Modifications to
tender documents.

-- 63 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
(2) A tender document and the envelope, in which it is
sealed in, shall bear the tender number assigned to the
procurement or asset disposal proceedings by the procuring
entity.
(3) A tender shall be submitted before the deadline for
submitting tenders and any tender submitted after the
deadline shall not be accepted by the procuring entity.
(4) The procuring entity shall ensure that the place or
site where tenders shall be submitted is open and accessible
and shall provide, in that place or site, a tender box
including an electronic tender box that complies with the
prescribed requirements in regulations.
(5) Each tender that is delivered shall be placed
unopened in the tender box —
(a) if the tender is delivered by post, by the staff of
the procuring entity immediately upon receipt; or
(b) if the tender is delivered otherwise than by post,
by the person delivering the tender.
(6) If a tender that is delivered by post is inadvertently
opened, the fact of that opening shall be recorded on the
envelope by the person who opened the tender and the
tender shall then be placed in the tender box.
(7) If a tender or part of a tender cannot fit in the
tender box it shall be received in the manner set out in the
tender documents or the invitation to tender or, if no such
manner is set out, in the manner determined by the
procuring entity and the procuring entity shall acknowledge
receipt of the tender documents.
78. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity Opening of tenders.
shall appoint a tender opening committee specifically for
the procurement in accordance with the following
requirements and such other requirements as may be
prescribed —
(a) the committee shall have at least three members;
and
(b) at least one of the members shall not be directly
involved in the processing or evaluation of the
tenders.

-- 64 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(2) Any bid withdrawn in writing shall not be eligible
for evaluation or consideration in the tender process.
(3) Immediately after the deadline for submitting
tenders, the tender opening committee shall open all
tenders received before that deadline.
(4) Those submitting tenders or their representatives
may attend the opening of tenders.
(5) The tender opening committee shall assign an
identification number to each tender and record the number
of pages received.
(6) As each tender is opened, the following shall be
read out loud and recorded in a document to be called the
tender opening register—
(a) the name of the person submitting the tender;
(b) the total price , where applicable including any
modifications or discounts received before the
deadline for submitting tenders except as may be
prescribed; and
(c) if applicable, what has been given as tender
security.
(7) No tenderer shall be disqualified by the procuring
entity during opening of tenders.
(8) The accounting officer of a procuring entity shall,
on request, provide a copy of the tender opening register to
a person submitting a tender.
(9) Each member of the tender opening committee
shall —
(a) sign each tender on one or more pages as
determined by the tender opening committee; and
(b) initial, in each tender, against the quotation of the
price and any modifications or discounts, where
applicable.
(10) The tender opening committee shall prepare
tender opening minutes which shall set out —
(a) a record of the procedure followed in opening the
tenders; and
(b) the particulars of those persons submitting
tenders, or their representatives, who attended the
opening of the tenders.

-- 65 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(11) To acknowledge that the minutes are true
reflection of the proceedings held, each member of the
tender opening committee shall —
(a) initial each page of the minutes;
(b) append his or her signature as well as initial to the
final page of the minutes indicating their full
name and designation.
(12) A person who causes the physical loss of tender
documents provided for under this section commits an
offence.
79. (1) A tender is responsive if it conforms to all the
eligibility and other mandatory requirements in the tender
documents .
(2) A responsive tender shall not be affected by —
(a) minor deviations that do not materially depart
from the requirements set out in the tender
documents; or
(b) errors or oversights that can be corrected without
affecting the substance of the tender.
(3) A deviation described in subsection (2)(a) shall —
(a) be quantified to the extent possible; and
(b) be taken into account in the evaluation and
comparison of tenders.
80. (1) The evaluation committee appointed by the
accounting officer pursuant to section 46 of this Act, shall
evaluate and compare the responsive tenders other than
tenders rejected under section 82(3).
(2) The evaluation and comparison shall be done using
the procedures and criteria set out in the tender documents
and, in the tender for professional services, shall have
regard to the provisions of this Act and statutory
instruments issued by the relevant professional associations
regarding regulation of fees chargeable for services
rendered.
(3) The following requirements shall apply with
respect to the procedures and criteria referred to in
subsection (2) —
No. 33
Responsiveness of
tenders.
Evaluation of
tenders.

-- 66 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(a) the criteria shall, to the extent possible, be
objective and quantifiable;
(b) each criterion shall be expressed so that it is
applied, in accordance with the procedures,
taking into consideration price, quality, time and
service for the purpose of evaluation; and
(4) The evaluation committee shall prepare an
evaluation report containing a summary of the evaluation
and comparison of tenders and shall submit the report to
the person responsible for procurement for his or her
review and recommendation.
(5) The person responsible for procurement shall,
upon receipt of the evaluation report prepared under
subsection (4), submit such report to the accounting officer
for approval as may be prescribed in regulations
(6) The evaluation shall be carried out within a
maximum period of thirty days.
(7) The evaluation report shall be signed by each
member of evaluation committee.
81. (1) A procuring entity may, in writing request a
clarification of a tender from tenderer to assist in the
evaluation and comparison of tenders.
(2) A clarification shall not change the terms of the
tender.
82. The tender sum as submitted and read out during
the tender opening shall be absolute and final and shall
not be the subject of correction, adjustment or
amendment in any way by any person or entity.
83. (1) An evaluation committee may, after tender
evaluation, but prior to the award of the tender, conduct
due diligence and present the report in writing to confirm
and verify the qualifications of the tenderer who submitted
the lowest evaluated responsive tender to be awarded the
contract in accordance with this Act.
(2) The conduct of due diligence under subsection (1)
may include obtaining confidential references from persons
with whom the tenderer has had prior engagement.
(3)To acknowledge that the report is a true reflection
of the proceedings held, each member who was part of the
due diligence by the evaluation committee shall—
Clarifications.
No correction of
errors.
•
Post-qualification.

-- 67 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(a) initial each page of the report; and
(b) append his or her signature as well as their full
name and designation.
84. (1) The head of procurement function of a
procuring entity shall, alongside the report to the evaluation
committee as secretariat comments, review the tender
evaluation report and provide a signed professional opinion
to the accounting officer on the procurement or asset
disposal proceedings.
(2) The professional opinion under sub-section (1)
may provide guidance on the procurement proceeding in
the event of dissenting opinions between tender evaluation
and award recommendations.
(3) In making a decision to award a tender, the
accounting officer shall take into account the views of the
head of procurement in the signed professional opinion
referred to in subsection (1).
85. Subject to prescribed thresholds all tenders shall fRecommendation
be evaluated by the evaluation committee of the procuring awards.
entity for the purpose of making recommendations to the
accounting officer through the head of procurement to
inform the decision of the award of contract to the
successful tenderers.
86. (1) The successful tender shall be the one who
meets any one of the following as specified in the tender
document—
(a) the tender with the lowest evaluated price;
(b) the responsive proposal with the highest score
determined by the procuring entity by combining, for
each proposal, in accordance with the procedures and
criteria set out in the request for proposals, the scores
assigned to the technical and financial proposals
where Request for Proposals method is used;
(c) the tender with the lowest evaluated total cost of
ownership; or
(d) the tender with the highest technical score, where a
tender is to be evaluated based on procedures
regulated by an Act of Parliament which provides
guidelines for arriving at applicable professional
charges.
Successful tender.
No. 33
Professional
opinion.

-- 68 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, citizen contractors, or
those entities in which Kenyan citizens own at least fifty-
one per cent shares, shall be entitled to twenty percent
of their total score in the evaluation, provided the entities or
contractors have attained the minimum technical score.
87. (1) Before the expiry of the period during which
tenders must remain valid, the accounting officer of the
procuring entity shall notify in writing the person
submitting the successful tender that his tender has been
accepted.
(2) The successful bidder shall signify in writing the
acceptance of the award within the time frame specified in
the notification of award.
(3) When a person submitting the successful tender is
notified under subsection (1), the accounting officer of the
procuring entity shall also notify in writing all other
persons submitting tenders that their tenders were not
successful, disclosing the successful tenderer as appropriate
and reasons thereof.
(4) For greater certainty, a notification under
subsection (1) does not form a contract nor reduce the
validity period for a tender or tender security.
88. (1) Before the expiry of the period during which
tenders shall remain valid the accounting officer of a
procuring entity may extend that period.
(2) The accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
give in writing notice of an extension under subsection (1)
to each person who submitted a tender.
(3) An extension under subsection (1) shall be
restricted to not more than thirty days and may only be
done once.
(4) For greater certainty, tender security shall be
forfeited if a tender is withdrawn after a bidder has
accepted the extension of biding period under subsection
(1).
89. If there will not be effective competition for a
procurement unless foreign tenderers participate, the
following shall apply —
(a) the invitation to tender and the tender documents
shall be in English;
Notification of
intention to enter
into a contract.
Extension of tender
validity period.
International
tendering and
competition.

-- 69 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(b) if the procuring entity is required to advertise the
invitation to tender under sections 96(2) and
118(2), the procuring entity shall also advertise
the invitation to tender in Kenya's dedicated
tenders portal or one or more English-language
newspapers or other publications that, together,
have sufficient circulation outside Kenya to allow
effective competition for the procurement;
(c) the period of time between the advertisement
under paragraph (b) and the deadline for
submitting tenders shall be not less than the
minimum period of time prescribed for the
purpose of this paragraph;
(d) the technical requirements shall, to the extent
compatible with requirements under Kenyan law,
be based on international standards or standards
widely used in international trade;
(e) a tenderer submitting a tender may, in quoting
prices or providing security, use a currency that is
widely used in international trade and that the
tender documents specifically allow to be used;
and
(f) where local or citizen contractors participate they
shall be entitled to preferences and reservations
as set out in section 85.
(g) any other conditions as may be prescribed.
RT VIII—CLASSIFIED PROCUREMENT METHODS
AND PROCEDURES
90. (1) For the avoidance of doubt, the provisions of
this Act shall also apply to all state organs and public
entities including the national security organs as established
under the Constitution and any other legislation.
(2) National security organs and other procuring
entities that deal with procurements of classified nature
shall manage their procurements and disposals on the basis
of a dual list maintained by the respective procuring entity
as prescribed.
(3) Procuring entities other than national security
organs referred to under sub-section (1), that procure
classified items shall request the Cabinet Secretary for
approval of the classified list of items annually.
No. 33
Classified
procurements and
disposals

-- 70 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(4) The dual list shall distinguish items subject to open
and to classified procurement and disposal proceedings
respectively.
(5) Procuring entities that deal with classified items
shall agree annually with the Cabinet Secretary on the
category of classified items to be included in the classified
list of procurements or disposals to be applied.
(6) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit the list of
classified items to Cabinet for approval.
(7) Any person carrying his or her duties or
responsibilities under this section shall maintain
confidentiality and shall not disclose any information that
may otherwise compromise national security.
(8) A person who in order to avoid open tendering,
procures items that ought to be subjected to open tendering
as though they were included in the list of classified items
commits an offence.
PART IX—METHODS OF PROCUREMENT OF
GOODS, WORKS AND SERVICES
91. (1) Open tendering shall be the preferred
procurement method for procurement of goods, works and
services.
(2) The procuring entity may use an alternative
procurement procedure only if that procedure is allowed
and satisfies the conditions under this Act for use of that
method.
(3) Despite sub-sections (1) and (2) open tendering
shall be adopted for procurement of goods, works and
services for the threshold prescribed in the respective
national and county Regulations
92. Subject to this Act and prescribed provisions, an
accounting officer of a procuring entity shall procure
goods, works or services by a method which may include
any of the following —
(a) open tender;
(b) two-stage tendering;
(c) design competition;
Choice of
procurement
procedure.
Methods of
procurement.

-- 71 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
(d) restricted tendering;
(e) direct procurement;
(f) request for quotations;
(g) electronic reverse auction;
(h) low value procurement;
(i) force account;
(j) competitive negotiations;
(k) request for proposals;
(1) framework agreements; and
(m) any other procurement method and procedure as
prescribed in regulations and described in the
tender documents.
93. (1) Subject to provisions of subsection (2), an Pre-qualification.
accounting officer of a procuring entity where applicable,
may conduct a pre-qualification procedure as a basic
procedure prior to adopting an alternative procurement
method other than open tender for the purpose of
identifying the best few qualified firms for the subject
procurement.
(2) Pre-qualification shall be for complex and
specialized goods, works and services.
(3) In conducting a pre-qualification procedure an
accounting officer of a procuring entity shall publish an
invitation notice to candidates to submit applications to be
pre-qualified.
(4) The invitation referred to in paragraph (2) shall
include —
(a) the name, address and contact details of the
procuring entity;
(b) outline of the procurement requirement, including
the nature and quantity of goods, works or services
and the location and timetable for delivery or
performance of the contract;
(c) statement of the key requirements and criteria to
pre-qualify;
(d) instructions on obtaining the pre-qualification
documents, including any price payable and the
language of the documents; and

-- 72 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(e) instructions on the location and deadline for
submission of applications to pre-qualify;
(f) applicable preferences and reservations or any
conditions arising from the related policy;
(g) declaration that it is open to bidders who meet the
eligibility criteria; and
(h) requirement that only bidders with capacity to
perform can apply.
94. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity Prequalification
documents.
shall promptly issue pre-qualification documents to all
candidates who request them and shall maintain a record of
all candidates to whom documents are issued.
(2) The pre-qualification document shall contain all
the information specified in section 93 and any other
information necessary for the potential candidates to
prepare and submit applications to be pre-qualified.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph
(2), such information shall include —
(a) the name, address and contact details of the
procuring entity;
(b) details of the procurement requirements, including
the nature and quantity of goods, works or services
and the location and timetable for delivery or
performance of the contract;
(c) instructions on the preparation of applications to
pre-qualify, including any standard forms to be
submitted and the documentary evidence and
information required from candidates;
(d) instructions on the sealing, labelling and submission
of applications to pre-qualify, including the location
and deadline for submission; and
(e) information on how applications will be evaluated.
(4) The accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
allow the candidates at least fourteen days to prepare and
submit their applications to be pre-qualified.
(5) The accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
promptly respond to all requests for any clarification
relating to the pre-qualification document where such
requests are received before the deadline for submission.

-- 73 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
95. (1) The evaluation committee shall, in writing,
record the results of its evaluation of applications for pre-
qualification using the evaluation criteria in the pre-
qualification documents and shall state which candidates
were found to be qualified and the reasons why any
candidates were not qualified.
(2) The record of results prepared under subsection (1)
shall be submitted with recommendations of the evaluation
committee and the professional opinion of the head of
procurement function to the accounting officer for
approval.
(3) A procuring entity shall invite tenders from only
the approved persons who have been pre-qualified.
(4) A procuring entity shall notify every candidate
who submitted an application for pre-qualification but did
not qualify.
Details of Procurement Methods
A - Open Tender
96. (1) The accounting officer of a procuring entity
shall take such steps as are reasonable to bring the
invitation to tender to the attention of those who may wish
to submit tenders.
(2) Despite the provisions of subsection (1), if the
estimated value of the goods, works or services being
procured is equal to, or more than the prescribed threshold
for county, national and international advertising, the
procuring entity shall advertise in the dedicated
Government tenders' portals or in its own website, or a
notice in at least two daily newspapers of nationwide
circulation.
(3) In addition to subsection (2) a procuring entity
shall —
(a) use Kenya's dedicated tenders portal or any other
electronic advertisements as prescribed; and
(b) post advertisements at any conspicuous place
reserved for this purpose in the premises of the
procuring entity.
(4) In regard to county-specific procurements pursuant
to section 33, the procuring entity shall advertise the notice
inviting expressions of interest in the dedicated
No. 33
Approval of pre-
qualified
candidates.
Advertisement.

-- 74 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
Government tenders portal; in its own website, or in at least
one daily newspaper of county-wide circulation.
(5) Where the estimated value of the goods, works or
services being procured is below the prescribed threshold
for national advertising, the procuring entity shall advertise
using the options available in subsection (3)(a) and (b).
97. (1) The time allowed for the preparation of tenders
shall not be less than the minimum period of time
prescribed for the purpose of this subsection.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the time allowed
for the preparation of tenders shall be exclusive of the day
of the tender notice.
98. (1) Upon advertisement, the accounting officer of
a procuring entity shall immediately provide copies of the
tender documents and in accordance with the invitation to
tender and the accounting officer shall upload the tender
document on the website.
(2) The accounting officer of a procuring entity may
charge such fees as may be prescribed for copies of the
tender documents.
B— Two-Stage Tendering
99. (1) A procuring entity may engage in procurement
by means of two-stage tendering when, due to complexity
and inadequate knowledge on its part or advancements in
technology, it is not feasible for the procuring entity to
formulate detailed specifications for the goods or works or
non-consultancy services in order to obtain the most
satisfactory solution to its procurement needs.
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply to two-
stage tendering proceedings except to the extent those
provisions are excluded from in this section and the
tendering document shall call upon tenderers to submit, in
the first stage of the two-stage tendering proceedings,
initial tenders containing their proposals without a tender
price.
(3) In the second stage, the procuring entity shall
invite tenderers whose tenders were retained to submit final
tenders with prices with respect to a single set of
specifications and in formulating those specifications, the
procuring entity may modify any aspect, originally set forth
in the tendering document.
Time for preparing
tenders.
Provision of tender
documents.
Two-Stage
Tendering.

-- 75 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(4) Any such modification or addition shall be
communicated to tenderers in the invitation to submit final
tenders and a tenderer not wishing to submit a final tender
may withdraw from the tendering proceedings without
forfeiting any tender security that they may have been
required to provide.
(5) The final tenders shall be evaluated and compared
in order to ascertain the successful tenderer.
(6) The specifications developed under subsection (3)
shall meet the requirements specified in this Act.
(7) When developing the specifications, the procuring
entity may engage experts.
C— Design Competition
100. An accounting officer of a procuring entity may
use a design competition procedure for the purpose of
determining the best architectural, physical planning and
any other design scheme, engineering, graphic or any other
design scheme for its use.
101. (1) In design competitions, a procuring entity
shall—
(a) invite design proposals through a public
advertisement;
(b) ensure the preparation of an invitation sets out
the following —
(i) the name and address of the procuring entity;
(ii) the tender number assigned to the
procurement proceedings by the procuring
entity;
(iii) description of technical and functional needs;
(iv) an explanation of where and when tenders
shall be submitted and where and when the
tenders will be opened;
(v) a statement that those submitting tenders or
their representatives may attend the opening
of the design proposals;
(vi) a statement that a copyright or other
intellectual property of the top three shall
vest in the State.
No. 33
Condition for use
of Design
Competitions.
Procedure for
design competition.

-- 76 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(2) The evaluation of design proposals shall be
undertaken by an evaluation committee established under
this Act.
(3) The design process shall be as prescribed in the
Regulations.
(4) Prior to publishing an invitation notice, an
accounting officer of a procuring entity shall prepare tender
documents and appoint at as part of ad hoc evaluation
committee instituted pursuant to this Act at least one
independent lay assessor, and technical assessors
recommended by the professional regulatory body
governing the design competition.
(5) The best three assessed design schemes shall
receive as a prize an honorarium as provided for in the
internal policies of the procuring entity subject to the
guidelines set out in the applicable county or national level
or the Regulations to this Act.
(6) In participating in design competitions, all bidders
shall undertake to transfer all copyrights, intellectual
property rights and patents relating to their designs to the
procuring entity.
(7) Upon completion of the design competition, all the
submitted design schemes shall become property of the
procuring entity.
D— Restricted Tendering
102. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
may use restricted tendering if any of the following
conditions are satisfied —
(a) competition for contract, because of the complex
or specialised nature of the goods, works or
services is restricted to prequalified tenderers
resulting from the procedure under section 94;
(b) the time and cost required to examine and
evaluate a large number of tenders would be
disproportionate to the value of the goods, works
or services to be procured; or
(c) if there is evidence to the effect that there are
only a few known suppliers of the whole market
of the goods, works or services;
Restricted
tendering.

-- 77 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(d) an advertisement is placed , where applicable, on
the procuring entity website regarding the
intention to procure through limited tender.
(2) An accounting officer of a procuring entity may
engage in procurement by means of restricted tendering in
such manner as may be prescribed.
E– Direct Procurement
103. (1) A procuring entity may use direct
procurement as allowed under sub-section (2) as long as the
purpose is not to avoid competition.
(2) A procuring entity may use direct procurement if
any of the following are satisfied —
(a) the goods, works or services are available only
from a particular supplier or contractor, or a
particular supplier or contractor has exclusive
rights in respect of the goods, works or services,
and no reasonable alternative or substitute exists;
(b) due to war, invasion, disorder, natural disaster or
there is an urgent need for the goods, works or
services, and engaging in tendering proceedings
or any other method of procurement would
therefore be impractical, provided that the
circumstances giving rise to the urgency were
neither foreseeable by the procuring entity nor
the result of dilatory conduct on its part;
(c) owing to a catastrophic event, there is an urgent
need for the goods, works or services, making it
impractical to use other methods of procurement
because of the time involved in using those
methods;
(d) the procuring entity, having procured goods,
equipment, technology or services from a
supplier or contractor, determines that additional
supplies shall be procured from that supplier or
contractor for reasons of standardization or
because of the need for compatibility with
existing goods, equipment, technology or
services, taking into account the effectiveness of
the original procurement in meeting the needs of
the procuring entity, the limited size of the
proposed procurement in relation to the original
No. 33
When direct
procurement may be
used.

-- 78 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
procurement, the reasonableness of the price and
the unsuitability of alternatives to the goods or
services in question;
(e) for the acquiring of goods, works or services
provided by a public entity provided that the
acquisition price is fair and reasonable and
compares well with known prices of goods,
works or services in the circumstances.
(3) A public officer who contravenes the provisions of
subsection (2) commits and offence.
104. An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
adhere to the following procedures with respect to direct
procurement —
(a) issue a tender document which shall be the basis
of tender preparation by tenderer and subsequent
negotiations.
(b) appoint an ad hoc evaluation committee pursuant
to section 46 to negotiate with a person for the
supply of goods, works or non-consultancy
services being provided;
(c) ensure appropriate approvals under this Act have
been granted ;
(d) ensure the resulting contract is in writing and
signed by both parties.
F –Request for Quotations
105. A procuring entity may use a request for
quotations from the register of suppliers for a procurement
if—
(a) the estimated value of the goods, works or non-
consultancy services being procured is less than
or equal to the prescribed maximum value for
using requests for quotations as prescribed in
Regulations;
(b) the procurement is for goods, works or non-
consultancy services that are readily available in
the market; and
Procedure for direct
procurement.
When request for
quotations may be
used.

-- 79 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
(c) the procurement is for goods, works or services
for which there is an established market.
Procedure for
request for
quotations.
106. (1) A procuring entity shall prepare a request for
quotations that sets out the following —
(a) the name and address of the procuring entity;
(b) the specific requirements prepared under section
67 relating to the goods, works or services being
procured;
(c) an explanation of where and when quotations
shall be submitted; and
(d) anything else required under this Act or the
Regulations to be set out in the request for
quotations.
(2) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
deal with the request for quotations in accordance with the
following —
(a) the accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
give the request to such persons as are registered
by the procuring entity;
(b) the request shall be given to as many persons as
necessary to ensure effective competition and
shall be given to at least three persons, unless that
is not possible;
(c) the accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
give the request to each person early enough so
that the person has adequate time to prepare a
quotation;
(d) at least three persons shall submit their quotations
prior to evaluation.
(3) The successful quotation shall be the quotation
with the lowest price that meets the requirements set out in
the request for quotations.
(4) Where the lowest price is above the prevailing
market rates, the request for quotations shall be cancelled
or terminated in accordance with the cancellation and
termination procedures set out in this Act.
(5) The following shall apply with respect to the
contract resulting from a procurement by a request for

-- 80 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
quotations —
(a) the procuring entity shall place a purchase order
with the person submitting the successful
quotation;
(b) the person submitting the successful quotation
shall confirm the purchase order in writing; and
(c) an accounting officer shall consider
recommendations for award arising from a
contract under procurement by a request for
quotations for approval or rejection.
G— Low - Value Procurement
When low-value
procurement may be
used.
107. A procuring entity may use a low-value
procurement procedure if —
(a) the entity is procuring low value items which are
not procured on a regular or frequent basis and
are not covered in framework agreement;
(b) the estimated value of the goods, works or non-
consultancy services being procured are less than
or equal to the maximum value per financial year
for that low-value procurement procedure as may
be prescribed.
108. The procedure and conditions for the use of low-
value procurement method by different classes of public
entities or different classes of goods, works or services
being procured shall be as prescribed in the regulations.
H— Force Account
109. (1) A procuring entity may use force account by
making recourse to the state or public officers and using
public assets, equipment and labour.
(2) A procuring entity may use force account by
making recourse to the state or public officers and using
public assets, equipment and labour which are competitive
and where —
(a) quantities of work involved are small and
Scattered or in remote locations for which
qualified construction firms are unlikely to tender
at reasonable price and the quantities of works
cannot be defined in advance;
Procedure for low-
value procurement.
Force Account.

-- 81 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(b) unforeseen and urgent work is required to be
carried out without disrupting on-going
operations;
(c) the procuring entity is to complete works delayed
by the contractor after the written warnings did
not yield any tangible results.
(3) This method shall only be applied—
(a) with the prior approval of the accounting officer;
(b) within the limit prescribed in Regulations;
(c) where the total cost of procuring the goods,
works and non-consultancy services are, at most,
set at the prevailing market rate.
(4) The procedure to use force account shall be as
prescribed in the Regulations.
I — Electronic Reverse Auction
110. The Authority may in exceptional circumstances
approve a system of electronic reverse auction method of
procurement for goods, works or non-consultancy services
by a procuring entity.
111. For an accounting officer of a procuring entity to
be qualified to use the reverse auction method it shall
possess —
(a) a procurement portal;
(b) an appropriate secure software with electronic
procurement capabilities and functionalities
approved by the Authority;
112. In the reverse auction method of procurement —
(a) a procuring entity shall —
(i) invite all registered suppliers in the specific
category to compete;
(ii) advertise its requirements on its website
including the period of time and goods
specifications;
(b) the prices of bidders within the prescribed time
shall be visible to other bidders without revealing
the bidder's identity; and
(c) a pre-qualified supplier shall not revise its bid
upwards within the prescribed time.
No. 33
Reverse Auction.
Conditions for use
of Reverse
Auctions.
Procedure for
Reverse Auction.

-- 82 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
Successful reverse
auctioneering bid.	113. Subject to the reserve price set by the procuring
entity, the successful bid shall be the bid with lowest price
at the bid submission deadline.
J—Framework Agreement
114. (1) A procuring entity may enter into a Framework
agreement.
framework agreement through open tender if —
(a) the procurement value is within the thresholds
prescribed under Regulations to this Act;
(b) the required quantity of goods, works or non-
consultancy services cannot be determined at the
time of entering into the agreement; and
(c) a minimum of seven alternative vendors are
included for each category
(2) The maximum term for the framework agreement
shall be three years and, for agreements exceeding one
year, a value for money assessment undertaken annually to
determine whether the terms designated in the framework
agreement remain competitive.
(3) When implementing a framework agreement, a
procuring entity may —
(a) procure through call-offs order when necessary; or
(b) invite mini-competition among persons that have
entered into the framework agreement in the
respective category.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3)(a), "call-offs
order" means an order made using a framework agreement
with one or more contractors, suppliers or consultants for a
defined quantity of works, goods, consultancy covering
terms and conditions including price that users require to
meet the immediate requirements.
(5) Evaluation of bids under category specified by
subsection (3)(b) shall be undertaken by an evaluation
committee as provided for under this Act.
(6) A procurement management unit shall prepare and
submit to the accounting officer with a copy to the internal
auditor quarterly reports detailing an analysis of items
procured through framework agreements and these reports
shall include, an analysis of pattern of usage, procurement

-- 83 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
costs in relation to the prevailing market rates and any
recommendations.
(7) For greater certainty procurements undertaken
through framework agreements may be subject to
preferences and reservations as provided for in this Act.
PART X— PROCUREMENT OF
CONSULTANCY SERVICES
115. This Part applies to procurement of professional
services which are predominately intellectual or advisory in
nature.
116. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
may use a request for proposals for a procurement if —
(a) the procurement is of services or a combination
of goods and services; and
(b) the services to be procured are advisory or
otherwise of a predominately intellectual nature.
(2) Subject to any prescribed restrictions, a procuring
entity may use a request for proposals in combination with
other methods of procurement under this Act.
117. Initiation of the procurement shall—
(a) be subject to section 74 of the Act.
(b) include in the terms of reference the expected
milestones or performance benchmarks to be
realized throughout the consultancy period and
the related timelines.
118. (1) The accounting officer of a procuring entity
may —
(a) request for proposal through advertisement; or
(b) invite expression of interests or utilize the
register provided for under section 57 of this Act.
(2) The accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
invite proposals from only the persons who have been
shortlisted as qualified to submit their tenders within a
period as prescribed.
119. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
may prepare a notice inviting interested persons to submit
No. 33
Application of this
Part.
When request for
proposals may be
used
Terms of reference
and invitation of
tenders from
shortlisted firms.
Request for
proposal inviting
expression of
interest.
Notice inviting
expressions of
interest.

-- 84 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
expressions of interest as prescribed.
(2) The notice inviting expressions of interest shall set
out the following —
(a) the name and address of the procuring entity;
(b) a brief description of the consultancy services
being procured and, if applicable, the goods
being procured;
(c) eligibility and the qualifications necessary to be
invited to submit a proposal; and
(d) an explanation of where and when expressions of
interest shall be submitted.
(3) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
advertise the notice inviting expressions of interest in the
dedicated government's advertising tenders' portal and in
its own website, or in at least one daily newspaper of
nation-wide circulation.
(4) In regard to county-specific procurements pursuant
to section 33 of this Act, an accounting officer of a
procuring entity shall advertise the notice inviting
expressions of interest in the dedicated government's
advertising tenders portal, its own website, or in at least
one daily newspaper of county-wide circulation as
prescribed.
120. The provisions of section 78 of this Act with
respect to the opening of proposals shall apply with
modifications.
121. (1) The accounting officer of a procuring entity
shall, in writing, record the results of its evaluation of
applications for expression of interest using the evaluation
criteria in the expression of interest notice and documents
and shall state which candidates were found to be qualified
and the reasons why any candidates were not qualified.
(2) The evaluation and comparison shall be done using
the procedures and criteria set out in the expression of
interest documents and shall, in the case of expression of
interest for professional services, have regard to the
provisions of this Act and statutory instruments issued by
the relevant professional associations regarding regulation
of fees chargeable for services rendered.
Opening of
proposals.
Evaluation and
shortlisting.

-- 85 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(3) Subject to total proposals received, a minimum of
six proposals shall be shortlisted, but where less than six
proposals have been received, a minimum of three
proposals shall be shortlisted.
(4) The record of results prepared under subsection (1)
shall be submitted to the accounting officer for review and
approval.
122.(1) After the deadline for submitting expressions
of interest the accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
examine each expression of interest to determine if the
person submitting it is qualified to be invited to submit a
proposal in accordance with the notice inviting expressions
of interest.
(2) The accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
simultaneously notify in writing each of the tenderers of the
results of the expression of interest.
123.(1) The accounting officers of a procuring entity
shall issue every person shortlisted who is qualified to be
invited to submit a request for proposals and a copy of the
terms of reference.
(2) The request for proposals shall set out the
following —
(a) the name and address of the accounting officer of
the procuring entity;
(b) the general and specific conditions to which the
contract will be subject,
(c) instructions for the preparation and submission of
proposals which may require that a proposal
include a technical proposal and a financial
proposal as prescribed;
(d) an explanation of where and when proposals shall
be submitted;
(e) the procedures and criteria to be used to evaluate
and compare the proposals including —
(i) the procedures and criteria for evaluating the
technical proposals which shall include a
determination of whether the proposal is
responsive;
No. 33
Determination of
qualified persons.
Request for
proposals to
qualified persons.

-- 86 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(ii) the procedures and criteria for evaluating the
financial proposals; and
(iii) any other additional method of evaluation,
which may include interviews or
presentations, and the procedures and
criteria for that additional method;
(f) a statement giving notice of the restriction, in
section 130, on entering into other contracts; and
(g) anything else required, under this Act or the
Regulations to be set out in the request for
proposals.
124. (1) The Procuring Entity shall select Quality and
Cost Based Selection (QCBS) method as the preferred
method to be used to evaluate proposals and shall state the
selection procedure in the Request for Proposals.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), "Quality and
Cost Based Selection" method is a method that uses a
competitive process that takes into account the quality of
the proposal and the cost of the services in the selection of
the successful firm.
(3) The request for proposal shall request submission
of both technical and financial proposals at the same time,
but in separate envelopes.
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,
in the evaluation of tenders by public entities, the criteria
for assessing the technical and financial capability of the
tenderers shall be as may be prescribed by the accounting
officer in the tender documents.
(5) The request for proposal under subsection (3) shall
provide either the estimated budget or the estimated time of
key experts, specifying that this information is given as an
indication only and that consultants shall be free to propose
their own estimates.
(6) Subject to prescribed restrictions, a procuring
entity may use any of the following alternatives in the
selection methods to evaluate proposals and shall state the
selection method in the Request for Proposals—
Selection methods
for requests for
proposals.

-- 87 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(a) Quality Based Selection (QBS), which focuses on
quality and selects the highest quality proposal;
(b) Least Cost Selection (LCS), which selects the
lowest priced proposal, which meets the entity's
technical requirements;
(c) Consultants Qualifications Selection (CQS);
(d) Individual Consultants Selection (ICS);
(e) Fixed Budget Selection; or
(f) Single Source Selection
(7) Quality Based Selection method shall be
appropriate for —
(a) complex or highly specialized assignments for
which it is difficult to define precise terms of
reference and the required input from the
consultants;
(b) assignments that have a high downstream impact
and in which the objective is to have the best
experts;
(c) assignments that can be carried out in
substantially different ways;
(d) assignments and professional services which are
regulated by Acts of Parliament which stipulate
fees and charges applicable for such assignments.
(8) Least-Cost Selection method under subsection
(6)(b) shall be generally appropriate for selecting
consultants for assignments of a standard or routine nature
where well-established practices and standards exist.
(9) Fixed Budget Selection as a request form for
proposal under subsection (6)(e) shall indicate the available
budget and request the consultants to provide their best
technical and financial proposals in separate envelopes,
within the budget.
(10) Fixed budget selection method is appropriate only
when the assignment is simple and can be precisely defined
and when the budget is fixed.
(11) Proposals under Fixed Budget selection method
that exceed the indicated budget shall be rejected and the
consultant who has submitted the highest ranked technical
No. 33

-- 88 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
proposal among the rest shall be selected and invited to
negotiate a contract.
(12) Single Source Selection may be appropriate in the
following cases, and only if it presents a clear advantage
over competition —
(a) where it can be evidenced that goods, works or
services are available only from a particular
supplier, or a particular supplier has exclusive
rights in respect of the consultancy services, and
no reasonable alternative or substitute exists; or
(b) for tasks that represent a natural continuation of
previous work carried out by the firm;
(c) in exceptional cases, such as, but not limited to,
in response to natural disasters and for a declared
national emergency situations.
(13) The accounting officer shall issue a written
justification for single-source selection in the context of the
overall interests of the procuring entity.
(14) Single Source Selection shall require a placement
of advertisement of the intention to single source and invite
anyone who wishes to bid and in the event that there is a
response to the advert then all interested suppliers shall be
invited to submit proposals.
(15) Where alternative methods are selected a report
shall be prepared and submitted to the Authority for
approval.
125. Time for preparation of proposals shall be in
accordance with section 97 of this Act.
126. (1) An evaluation committee of a procuring entity
shall examine the proposals received in accordance with
the request for proposals.
(2) The procedures for evaluation of the request for
proposal shall be by using each selection method set out in
section 124 and as may be prescribed.
Evaluation of
proposals.
Time for preparing
proposals.

-- 89 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(3) The evaluation shall be carried out within a
maximum of twenty-one days, but shorter periods may be
prescribed in the Regulations for particular types of
procurement.
(4) When a person submitting the successful bid shall
be notified, the accounting officer of the procuring entity
shall at the same time notify in writing all other persons
who had submitted bids that their bids were not successful
and give reasons thereof.
(5) The notice of intention to enter into contract in
subsection 87(2) shall, as applicable, be publicised on the
procuring entity's website and other public notice boards
that do not attract a cost.
127. The successful proposal shall be the responsive
proposal with the highest score determined by an
accounting officer in accordance with procedure and
criteria set out under section 86 of this Act.
128. (1) The accounting officer may negotiate with the
person who submitted the successful proposal and may
request and permit changes, subject to section 106(2).
(2) If the negotiations with the person who submitted
the successful proposal do not result in a contract, the
accounting officer may negotiate with the second person
who submitted the proposal that would have been
successful had the successful proposal not been submitted.
(3) Despite subsection (1) and (2) of this section, an
offer made to any other person shall not have any price
advantages over the earlier one.
129. (1) The contract may not vary from the
requirements of the terms of reference, the request for
proposals or the terms of the successful proposal except in
accordance with the following —
(a) the contract may provide for a different price but
only if there is a proportional increase or
reduction in what is to be provided under the
contract; and
(b) the variations shall be such that if the proposal,
with those variations, was evaluated again under
No. 33
Successful
proposal.
Negotiations with
successful request
for proposal
tenderer.
Contract
requirements.

-- 90 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
section 104, the proposal would still be the
successful proposal.
(2) The contract, which shall be in writing, shall set
out either —
(a) the maximum amount of money that can be paid
under the contract; or
(b) the maximum amount of time that can be paid for
under the contract.
Restriction on
entering into related
contracts.
130. A person who enters into a contract resulting
from procurement by a request for proposals shall not enter
into any other subsequent contract for the procurement of
goods, services or works related to that original contract.
131. An accounting officer of a procuring entity may
conduct competitive negotiations as prescribed where —
(a) there is a tie in the lowest evaluated price by two
or more tenderers;
(b) there is a tie in highest combined score points;
(c) the lowest evaluated price is in excess of
available budget; or
(d) there is an urgent need that can be met by several
known suppliers.
132. In the procedure for competitive negotiations, an
accounting officer of a procuring entity shall —
(a) identify the tenderers affected by tie;
(b) identify the tenderers that quoted prices above
available budget; or
(c) identify the known suppliers as prescribed.
(2) In the case of tenderers that quoted above the
available budget, an accounting officer of a procuring
entity shall —
(a) reveal its available budget to tenderers; and
(b) limit its invitation to tenderers whose evaluated
prices are not more than twenty five percent
above the available budget.
Competitive
Negotiations.
Procedure for
Competitive
Negotiations.

-- 91 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(3) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
request the identified tenderers to revise their tenders by
submitting their best and final offer within a period not
exceeding seven days.
(4) The revised prices shall not compromise the
quality specifications of the original tender.
(5) Tenders shall be evaluated by the evaluation
committee appointed in the initial process.
133. (1) The successful best and final offer shall be the
best rated tender using evaluation criteria set forth in the
tender documents.
(2) Cabinet Secretary may develop further guidelines
on the powers and thresholds for tender awards.
PART XI—PROCUREMENT CONTRACTS
134. (1) The accounting officer shall be responsible
for preparation of contracts in line with the award decision.
(2) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
ensure that all contracts of a value exceeding Kenya
shillings five billion are cleared by the Attorney-General
before they are signed.
(3) Each Cabinet Secretary shall regularly inform the
Cabinet and national treasury of all government contracts
exceeding Kenya shillings five billion.
(4) Notwithstanding the provision of subsection (3)
above, any Cabinet Secretary may brief Cabinet on any
other project of national importance irrespective of its
value.
(5) This section shall not apply to contracts by
Parliament and the Judiciary.
135. (1) The existence of a contract shall be confirmed
through the signature of a contract document incorporating
all agreements between the parties and such contract shall
be signed by the accounting officer or an officer authorized
in writing by the accounting officer of the procuring entity
and the successful tenderer.
(2) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
enter into a written contract with the person submitting the
successful tender based on the tender documents and any
No. 33
Successful best and
final offer.
Preparation of
contracts.
Creation of
procurement
contracts.

-- 92 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
clarifications that emanate from the procurement
proceedings.
(3) The written contract shall be entered into within
the period specified in the notification but not before
fourteen days have elapsed following the giving of that
notification provided that a contract shall be signed within
the tender validity period.
(4) No contract is formed between the person
submitting the successful tender and the accounting officer
of a procuring entity until the written contract is signed by
the parties.
(5) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
not enter into a contract with any person or firm unless an
award has been made and where a contract has been signed
without the authority of the accounting officer, such a
contract shall be invalid.
(6) The tender documents shall be the basis of all
procurement contracts and shall, constitute at a minimum —
(a) Contract Agreement Form;
(b) Tender Form;
(c) price schedule or bills of quantities
submitted by the tenderer;
(d) Schedule of Requirements;
(e) Technical Specifications;
(f) General Conditions of Contract;
(g) Special Conditions of Contract;
(h) Notification of Award.
(7) A person who contravenes the provisions of this
section commits an offence.
136. (1) If the person submitting the successful tender
refuses to enter into a written contract in writing as
required under section 135 and section 61 of this Act, he or
she shall forfeit his or her tender security and the
procurement process shall proceed with the next lowest
evaluated tenderer.
(2) This section does not apply if the period during
which tenders shall remain valid has already expired.
Refusal to sign
contract.

-- 93 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
137. The accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
not request or require, as a condition of awarding a
contract, that a person who submitted a tender undertake
responsibilities not set out in the tender documents.
138. (1) The accounting officer of a procuring entity
shall publish and publicise all contract awards on their
notice boards at conspicuous places, and website if
available within a period as prescribed.
(2) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
report all contract awards to the Authority as prescribed.
(3) The Authority shall publish on its website notices
of the reports on contract awards from procuring entities.
(4) The Authority shall issue written directions and
guidelines governing the reporting requirements of contract
awards by the accounting officer of procuring entities as
may be prescribed in regulations.
(5) This section shall not apply to procurement
contracts awarded by the national security organs.
139. (1) An amendment or a variation to a contract
resulting from a procurement proceeding is effective only
if —
(a) the variation or amendment has been approved
in writing by the respective tender awarding
authority within a procuring entity; and
(b) any contract variations or amendments for
goods, works and services shall be as
prescribed.
(2) An accounting officer of a procuring entity, on
the recommendation of an evaluation committee, may
approve the request for the following, which request shall
be accompanied by a certificate from the tenderer making a
justifications for such cost —
(a) extension of contract period;
(b) use of prime costs;
(c) use of contingencies;
(d) reimbursable costs; and
(e) use of provisional sums.
(3) No contract price shall be varied upwards within
twelve months from the date of the signing of the contract.
No. 33
Changes to contract
respon sibilities.
Publication of
procurement
contracts.
Amendments or
variations to
contracts.

-- 94 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(4) For the purposes of this section, any variation of a
contract shall only be considered after twelve months from
the date of signing the contract and shall only be
considered if the following are satisfied —
(a) the price variation is based on the prevailing
consumer price index obtained from Kenya
National Bureau of Statistics or the monthly
inflation rate issued by the Central Bank of
Kenya;
(b) the quantity variation for goods and services does
not exceed fifteen per cent of the original
contract quantity;
(c) the quantity variation of works does not exceed
twenty per cent of the original contract quantity;
(d) the price or quantity variation is to be executed
within the period of the contract; and
(e) the cumulative value of all contract variations do
not result in an increment of the total contract
price by more than twenty five per cent of the
original contract price.
(5) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
submit a quarterly report of their varied or amended
procurement contracts to the Authority.
(6) Where variations result in an increment of the
contract price by more than twenty-five percent, such
variations shall be tendered for separately.
140. The following shall apply with respect to delayed
performance and overdue amounts owed by a procuring
entity and a contractor under a contract for a
procurement —
(a) unless the contract provides otherwise, the
procuring entity shall pay interest on the overdue
amounts;
(b) the contractor shall be liable to liquidated
damages for delayed performance;
(c) the interest and liquidated damages to be paid
under paragraph (a) and (b) shall be in
accordance: with prevailing mean commercial
lending rate as determined by Central Bank of
Kenya; and
Interest on overdue
amounts and
liquidated damages.

-- 95 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(d) the methods of computing interest liquidated and
ascertained damages shall be as prescribed in the
regulations.
141. Subject to any prescribed restrictions an
accounting officer of a procuring entity may apply
framework contracting arrangements by making awards of
indefinite-delivery contracts and multiple awards of
indefinite-quantity contracts for procurements under this
Act.
142. (1) Subject to the regulations, a successful
tenderer shall submit a performance security equivalent to
not more than ten per cent of the contract amount before
signing of the contract.
(2) In case the contract is not fully or well executed,
the performance security shall unconditionally be fully
seized by the procuring entity as compensation without
prejudice to other penalties provided for by the Act.
(3) Provisions under subsection (1) of this section
shall not apply to tenders related to consultant services,
works and supplies where their estimated value does not
exceed a threshold established by the procurement
regulations, or works and supplies reserved for women,
youth, persons with disabilities and other disadvantaged
groups, and for these categories, the performance securities
that may be waived or fixed at not more than one per cent
of the contract price.
143. The performance security may not generate
interest and it shall be determined in accordance with the
form provided for in the tendering document and may be
paid in form of a bank guarantee, issued by an authorized
financial institution or an irrevocable letter of credit.
144. (1) The tender document shall provide for, if
necessary, other forms of performance security that may be
requested from the successful tenderer.
(2) The bank or authorized financial institution shall
be obliged to give to the procuring entity all the amount of
the performance security upon claim by the latter.
(3) The bank or authorized financial institution shall
also be obliged to pay an additional interest of one percent
(1%) for every day of payment delay after ten (10) working
days from the receipt of the claim provided this
No. 33
Framework
Contracting.
Performance
Security.
Nature of
performance
security.
Seizure of the
performance
Security.

-- 96 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
requirement is disclosed in the performance security and if
it is necessary to take the matter to courts, and that the
court rules in favour of the procuring entity, this interest
shall continue to accrue up to the time the courts' decision
is executed.
(4) If the contractor is foreign, the guarantee shall be
issued by a local bank or authorised financial institution
issued by a corresponding bank in Kenya recognized the
Central Bank of Kenya.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall make Regulations for
the better carrying out of this section.
145. (1) The performance security shall be returned to
the successful tenderer within thirty (30) days following the
final acceptance by the accounting officer of the procuring
entity.
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, the thirty (30) days
referred to in subsection (1) above shall include the
retention period except in cases of procurement for works
where the period shall commence from the date of practical
completion or handover, whichever is earlier.
146. No works, goods or services contract shall be
paid for before they are executed or delivered and accepted
by the accounting officer of a procuring entity or an officer
authorized by him or her in writing except where so
specified in the tender documents and contract agreement.
Such an advance payment shall not be paid before the
contract is signed.
147. (1) Under exceptional circumstances advance
payment may be granted and shall not exceed twenty per
cent (20 %) of the price of the tender and shall be paid
upon submission by the successful tenderer to the
procuring entity of an advance payment security equivalent
to the advance itself and that security shall be given by a
reputable bank or any authorized financial institution issued
by a corresponding bank in Kenya recognized by the
Central Bank of Kenya, in case the successful tenderer is a
foreigner.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall make Regulations for
the better carrying out of this section.
Recovery of the
performance
Security.
Advance payment.
Amount of advance
payment and its
security.

-- 97 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
148. The successful tenderer shall use the advance
paid only in activities related to the tender. If the successful
tenderer uses the entire advance or part of it in other
activities that are unrelated to the tender, the advance shall
immediately be considered as a debt which shall be paid by
seizing the entire security or part of it.
149. (1) If the tender documents do not prohibit
subcontracting, the successful tenderer may subcontract
part of the tender but only if the person to be subcontracted
has not been debarred from procurement proceedings in
accordance with this Act or has participated in the
procurement of goods, works or services related to that
contract.
(2) The successful tenderer shall be responsible
towards the procuring entity for the obligations of the sub-
contractor.
150. (1) An accounting officer or his or her appointed
representative shall be responsible for ensuring that the
goods, works and services are of the right quality and
quantity.
(2) The head of the procurement function shall be
responsible for assisting the accounting officer to confirm
the right quality and quantity of goods, works and services
have been delivered to the procuring entity and shall issue a
certificate of acceptance to the accounting officer except
where technical specifications are from another technical
department or professionals engaged to work on behalf of
the accounting officer.
(3) Where goods, works and services under sub-
section (2), are of technical nature and the specifications
were provided by a technical department or professionals
engaged to work on behalf of the accounting officer, that
technical department or professionals engaged to work on
behalf of the accounting officer shall be responsible for
confirming the right quality and quantity of goods, works
or services have been delivered and issue a certificate to the
recipient accounting officer.
151. (1) For every complex and specialized
procurement contract, the accounting officer of a procuring
entity shall appoint a contract implementation team which
shall include members from the procurement function, and
No. 33
Use of advance
payment.
Sub-contracting.
Contract
administration.
Complex and
specialized contract
implementation
team.

-- 98 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
the requisitioner, the relevant technical department and a
consultant where applicable.
(2) For the purpose of managing complex and
specialized procurement contracts the contract
implementation team shall be responsible for —
(a) monitoring the performance of the contractor, to
ensure that all delivery or performance
obligations are met or appropriate action taken by
the procuring entity in the event of obligations
not being met;
(b) ensure that the contractor submits all required
documentation as specified in the tendering
documents, the contract and as required by law;
(c) ensure that the procuring entity meets all its
payment and other obligations on time and in
accordance with the contract.
(d) ensure that there is right quality and within the
time frame, where required;
(e) review any contract variation requests and make
recommendations to the respective tender
awarding authority for considerations and such
reviews for variation shall be clearly justified by
the technical department in writing backed by
supporting evidence and submitted to the head of
the procurement function for processing;
(f) manage handover or acceptance procedures as
prescribed;
(g) make recommendations for contract termination,
where appropriate;
(h) ensure that the contract is complete, prior to
closing the contract file including all handover
procedures, transfers of title if need be and that
the final retention payment has been made;
(i) ensure that all contract administration records are
complete, up to date, filed and archived as
required; and
(j) ensure that the contractor acts in accordance with
the provisions of the contract;

-- 99 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(k) ensure discharge of performance guarantee where
required.
(3) An accounting officer of a procuring entity may
co-opt a member of the contract implementation team from
another procuring entity or outsource.
152. The head of the procurement function shall
prepare monthly progress reports of all procurement
contracts of the procuring entity and submit them to the
accounting officer.
153. (1) Upon the request of the procurement
management unit, the accounting officer of a procuring
entity may approve the request for termination of contract.
(2) A contract document shall specify the grounds on
which the contract may be terminated and specify the
procedures applicable on termination.
154. An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
close out a procurement contract immediately after
completion and the close out shall involve the following —
(a) the head of procurement function shall issue a
certificate to the contractor confirming delivery
and acceptance of goods, works and services,
where the contract is not complex and
specialized;
(b) where contract under (a) above is complex and
specialized, the technical department will issue a
certificate to the accounting officer of the
procuring entity confirming the quality and
quantity of such goods, works and services;
(c) further guidelines for the receipt of goods, works
and services shall be as prescribed.
PART XII—PREFERENCES AND RESERVATION
IN PROCUREMENT
155. (1) Pursuant to Article 227(2) of the Constitution
and despite any other provision of this Act or any other
legislation, all procuring entities shall comply with the
provisions of this Part.
(2) Subject to availability and realisation of the
applicable international or local standards, only such
manufactured articles, materials or supplies wholly mined
and produced in Kenya shall be subject to preferential
procurement.
No. 33
Contract
monitoring.
Termination of
contract.
Contract close out.
Requirement for
preferences and
reservations.

-- 100 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(3) Despite the provisions of subsection (1),
preference shall be given to —
(a) manufactured articles, materials and supplies
partially mined or produced in Kenya or where
applicable have been assembled in Kenya; or
(b) firms where Kenyans are shareholders.
(4) The threshold for the provision under subsection
(3) (b) shall be above fifty-one percent of Kenyan
shareholders.
(5) Where a procuring entity seeks to procure items
not wholly or partially manufactured in Kenya —
(a) the accounting officer shall cause a report to be
prepared detailing evidence of inability to
procure manufactured articles, materials and
supplies wholly mined or produced in Kenya; and
(b) the procuring entity shall require successful
bidders to cause technological transfer or create
employment opportunities as shall be prescribed
in the Regulations.
156. Where a person is entitled to more than one
preference scheme, the scheme with the highest advantage
to the person shall be applied.
157. (1) Candidates shall participate in procurement
proceedings without discrimination except where
participation is limited in accordance with this Act and the
regulations.
(2) Subject to subsection (8), the Cabinet Secretary
shall, in consideration of economic and social development
factors, prescribe preferences and or reservations in public
procurement and asset disposal.
(3) The preferences and reservations referred to in
subsection (2) shall —
(a) be non-discriminatory in respect of the targeted
groups;
(b) allow competition amongst the eligible persons;
and
(c) be monitored and evaluated by the Authority.
Eligibility for more
than one preference
scheme.
Participation of
candidates in
preference and
reservations.

-- 101 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(4) For the purpose of protecting and ensuring the
advancement of persons, categories of persons or groups
previously disadvantaged by unfair competition or
discrimination, reservations, preferences and shall apply
to-
(a) candidates such as disadvantaged groups;
(b) micro, small and medium enterprises;
(c) works, services and goods, or any combination
thereof;
(d) identified regions; and
(e) such other categories as may be prescribed.
(5) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall,
when processing procurement, reserve a prescribed
percentage of its procurement budget, which shall not be
less than thirty per cent, to the disadvantaged group and
comply with the provisions of this Act and the regulations
in respect of preferences and reservations.
(6) To qualify for a specific preference or reservation,
a candidate shall provide evidence of eligibility as
ptescribed.
(7) The Authority shall maintain an up-to-date register
of contractors in works, goods and services, or any
combination thereof, in order to be cognizant at all times of
the workload and performance record.
(8) In applying the preferences and reservations under
this section —
(a) exclusive preference shall be given to citizens of
Kenya where —
(i) the funding is 100% from the national
government or county government or a
Kenyan body; and
(ii) the amounts are below the prescribed
threshold;
(iii) the prescribed threshold for
exclusive preference shall be above five
hundred million shillings;
(b) a prescribed margin of preference shall be
given—
No. 33

-- 102 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(i) in the evaluation of tenders to candidates
offering goods manufactured, assembled,
mined, extracted or grown in Kenya; or
(ii) works, goods and services where a preference
may be applied depending on the percentage
of shareholding of the locals on a graduating
scale as prescribed.
(9) For the purpose of ensuring sustainable promotion
of local industry, a procuring entity shall have in its tender
documents a mandatory requirement as preliminary
evaluation criteria for all foreign tenderers participating in
international tenders to source at least forty percent of their
supplies from citizen contractors prior to submitting a
tender.
(10) Despite subsection (2) or any other provisions of
this Act, every procuring entity shall ensure that at least
thirty percent of its procurement value in every financial
year is allocated to the youth, women and persons with
disability.
(11) Every procuring entity shall ensure that all
money paid out to an enterprise owned by youth, women
or persons with disability is paid into an account where the
mandatory signatory is a youth, woman or a person with
disability.
(12) The procuring entities at the national and county
level shall make a report after every six months to the
Authority.
(13) A report under subsection (12) shall—
(a) certify compliance with the provisions of this
section; and
(b) provide data disaggregated to indicate the
number of youth, women and persons with
disability whose goods and services have been
procured by the procuring entity.
(14) The Authority shall make a report to Parliament
after every six months for consideration by the relevant
committee responsible for equalization of opportunities for
youth, women and persons with disability, which report
shall contain details of the procuring entities and how they
have complied with the provisions of this section

-- 103 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(15) The Cabinet Secretary shall prescribe the
preferences that shall facilitate the attainment of the quota
specified in subsection (10) in order for the State to achieve
the objectives of Articles 55 and 227(2) of the
Constitution.
(16) The preferences referred to in subsection (15)
shall—
(a) be prescribed within ninety days after
commencement of this Act;
(b) be subject to such conditions as the Cabinet
Secretary may specify therein but such
conditions shall notR pose any unnecessary
impediment to the youth from participating in
public procurement.
(17) The National Treasury shall operationalize a
preference and reservations secretariat to be responsible for
the implementation of the preferences and reservations
under this Act which shall be responsible for—
(a) registration, prequalification and certification
of the persons, categories of persons or groups
as provided for in under Part XII;
(b) training and capacity building of the above
target groups;
(c) providing technical and advisory assistance to
procuring entities in the implementation of the
preferences and reservations under this Act;
and
(d) monitoring and evaluating the implementation
of the preferences and reservations under this
Act.
(18) The National Treasury shall provide adequate
staff and resources for the operations of the secretariat.
158. (1) The procuring entities shall integrate
preferences and reservations in their procurement plans.
(2) The procuring entity shall submit to the Authority
the part in its procurement plan demonstrating application
of preference and reservation schemes in relation to
procurement budget within sixty days after commencement
of the financial year.
No. 33
Procuranent plans
and monitoring
compliance.

-- 104 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(3) All procurement awards by procuring entities
where a preference or reservation scheme was applied shall
be reported with disaggregated data to the Authority on a
quarterly basis.
PART 3M—INVENTORY CONTROL, ASSET AND
STORES MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
159. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
shall only receipt goods, works and services which have
been certified in accordance with this section and section
152 of this Act.
(2) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
record goods, works and services received under subsection
(1) in an inventory of the procuring entity as shall be
prescribed.
160. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
manage its inventory, assets and stores for the purpose of
preventing wastage and loss, and continuing utilization of
supplies.
(2) To avoid unprofitable lock-up of funds, stocks shall
be kept to the minimum necessary for the efficient conduct of
the procuring entities.
(3) The accounting officer of a procuring entity may
employ inventory management and control software to assist it
meet the objectives of sound supply chain management.
161. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity
shall set up an inventory management system which shall
be managed by the head of the procurement function, for
the purpose of control and managing its inventory, stores
and assets.
(2) The responsibilities for the control and management
of a procuring entity's inventories, stores and assets
management shall be as prescribed.
162. (1) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
ensure that all inventory, stores and assets purchased are
received, but shall not be used until taken on charge and as a
basis for ensuring that all procured items are properly
accounted for and put in proper use as intended by the
procuring entity.
(2) The head of procurement function shall arrange for
occasional visits of inspection to the stores, at least quarterly in
Receipt, and
recording of goods,
works and services.
Objectives of
Inventory Control,
Asset and Stores
Management and
Distribution.
Inventory, Stores
and Assets
Management
system.
Management of
Inventory, Stores
and Assets.

-- 105 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
each calendar year, and conduct quarterly and annual
inventory and stock taking in order to ensure compliance
with all respective governing laws and submit the report to the
accounting officer.
(3) Stores, inventory and assets that are procured by a
public entity shall not be allowed to suffer deterioration from
any preventable cause and overstocking of any particular item
shall be avoided.
(4) All procured items assigned for use by a public or
state officer shall be requisitioned from and issued by the head
of the procurement function of a procuring entity.
(5) An accounting officer of a procuring entity shall
follow policy set out by the Cabinet Secretary specifying
the life span of each category of items before boarding for
disposal.
(6) The Authority shall issue manuals and guidelines
regarding all aspects of inventory, stores and asset
management.
PART XIV — DISPOSAL OF ASSETS
163. (1) An accounting officer shall establish a
disposal committee as and when prescribed for the purpose
of disposal of unserviceable, obsolete, obsolescent, or
surplus stores, equipment or assets.
(2) The disposal committee shall be responsible for
verification and processing of all disposal
recommendations in liaison with the head of procurement
function as prescribed.
164. (1) The employee in charge of unserviceable,
obsolescent, obsolete or surplus assets shall bring the
matter to the attention of the disposal committee through
the head of procurement function.
(2) An employee shall comply with subsection (1)
within a reasonable time after the assets become
unserviceable, obsolete or surplus.
(3) There shall be a technical report where appropriate
by a relevant expert of the subject items for disposal that
takes into account the real market price and in so doing, the
technical expert shall set up a reserve price which shall be
No. 33
Disposal committee.
Disposal procedure.

-- 106 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
the minimum acceptable price below real market value of
the boarded items.
(4) Subject to prescribed restrictions, the disposal
committee shall meet within the prescribed period to
conduct a survey and review the items, while considering
the technical report under subsection (3) and recommend
the best method of disposal to the accounting officer.
(5) The Accounting officer shall disclose the reserve
price to the prospective tenderers based on the technical
report and prices set under subsection (3) of this section.
(6) Where there is no responsive bidder under
subsection (5), the accounting officer shall have powers
based on the recommendations of disposal committee to
revise the reserve price to ensure expeditious disposal of
assets and set it forth in the disposal documents so as to be
known by any prospective buyer of the boarded items.
(7) After receiving the recommendations of the
disposal committee, the accounting officer may approve or
reject the recommendation of the committee.
(8) If the accounting officer approves the
recommendations of the disposal committee, the assets that
became unserviceable, obsolete or surplus shall be
disposed-off in accordance with those recommendations.
(9) If the accounting officer rejects the
recommendations of the disposal committee he or she shall
give further direction on the matter and may refer the
matter back to the committee for further consideration.
165. (1) Subject to prescribed provisions, an
accounting officer of a procuring entity may dispose assets
by a method which may include any of the following —
(a) transfer to another public entity or part of a
public entity, with or without financial
adjustment;
(b) sale by public tender;
(c) sale by public auction;
(d) trade-in;
Methods of
disposal.

-- 107 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(e) waste disposal management; or
(f) as may be prescribed.
(2) Despite subsection (1) or any other provisions of
this Act, radioactive or electronic waste shall be disposed
of only to persons licensed to handle the respective waste
under section 88 of the Environmental Management and
Co-ordination Act, 1999.
166. (1) An accounting officer of a public entity shall
not dispose-off assets to an employee of the public entity or
a member of a board or committee of the public entity
except as expressly allowed under this Act and the
regulations.
(2) An accounting officer who, pursuant to artificial
valuation, disposes off assets to an employee of the public
entity or a member of a board or committee of the public
entity commits an offence.
PART XV—ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF
PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL PROCEEDINGS
167. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, a
candidate or a tenderer, who claims to have suffered or to
risk suffering, loss or damage due to the breach of a duty
imposed on a procuring entity by this Act or the
Regulations, may seek administrative review within
fourteen days of notification of award or date of occurrence
of the alleged breach at any stage of the procurement
process, or disposal process as in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) A request for review shall be accompanied by such
refundable deposit as may be prescribed in the regulations,
and such deposit shall not be less than ten per cent of the
cost of the contract.
(3) A request for review shall be heard and determined
in an open forum unless the matter at hand is likely to
compromise national security or the review procedure.
(4) The following matters shall not be subject to the
review of procurement proceedings under subsection (1)-
(a) the choice of a procurement method;
(b) a termination of a procurement or asset disposal
proceedings in accordance with section 62 of this
Act; and
No. 33
Restriction on
disposal to
employees, etc.
Request for a
review.

-- 108 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
(c) where a contract is signed in accordance with
section 135 of this Act.
168. Upon receiving a request for a review under
section 167, the Secretary to the Review Board shall notify
the accounting officer of a procuring entity of the pending
review from the Review Board and the suspension of the
procurement proceedings in such manner as may be
prescribed.
169. The Review Board Secretariat shall reject a
request for a review where no appeal fees were paid within
the prescribed time.
170. The parties to a review shall be —
(a) the person who requested the review;
(b) the accounting officer of a procuring entity;
(c) the tenderer notified as successful by the
procuring entity; and
(d) such other persons as the Review Board may
determine.
171. (1) The Review Board shall complete its review
within twenty one days after receiving the request for the
review.
(2) In no case shall any appeal under this Act stay or
delay the procurement process beyond the time stipulated
in this Act or the Regulations made thereunder.
172. Review Board may dismiss with costs a request if
it is of the opinion that the request is frivolous or vexatious
or was made solely for the purpose of delaying the
procurement proceedings or performance of a contract and
the applicant shall forfeit the deposit paid.
173. Upon completing a review, the Review Board
may do any one or more of the following —
(a) annul anything the accounting officer of a
procuring entity has done in the procurement
proceedings, including annulling the procurement
or disposal proceedings in their entirety;
(b) give directions to the accounting officer of a
procuring entity with respect to anything to be
done or redone in the procurement or disposal
proceedings;
Notification of
review and
suspension of
proceedings.
Rejection of
requests by Review
Board Secretariat.
Parties to review.
Completion of
review.
Dismissal of
frivolous appeals.
Powers of Review
Board.

-- 109 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(c) substitute the decision of the Review Board for
any decision of the accounting officer of a
procuring entity in the procurement or disposal
proceedings;
(d) order the payment of costs as between parties to
the review in accordance with the scale as
prescribed; and
(e) order termination of the procurement process and
commencement of a new procurement process.
174. The right to request a review under this Part is in
addition to any other legal remedy a person may have.
175. (1) A person aggrieved by a decision made by the
Review Board may seek judicial review by the High Court
within fourteen days from the date of the Review Board's
decision, failure to which the decision of the Review Board
shall be final and binding to both parties.
(2) The application for a judicial review shall be
accepted only after the aggrieved party pays a percentage
of the contract value as security fee as shall be prescribed
in Regulations.
(3) The High Court shall determine the judicial review
application within forty-five days after such application.
(4) A person aggrieved by the decision of the High
Court may appeal to the Court of Appeal within seven days
of such decision and the Court of Appeal shall make a
decision within forty-five days which decision shall be
final.
(5) If either the High Court or the Court of Appeal
fails to make a decision within the prescribed timeline
under subsection (3) or (4), the decision of the Review
Board shall be final and binding to all parties.
(6) A party to the review which disobeys the decision
of the Review Board or the High Court or the Court of
Appeal shall be in breach of this Act and any action by
such party contrary to the decision of the Review Board or
the High Court or the Court of Appeal shall be null and
void.
(7) Where a decision of the Review Board has been
quashed, the High Court shall not impose costs on either
partY.
No. 33
Right to review is
additional right.
Right to judicial
review to
procurement.

-- 110 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
PART XVI—OFFENCES AND SANCTIONS
176. (1) A person shall not —
(a) obstruct or hinder a person carrying out a duty or
function or exercising a power under this Act;
(b) knowingly lie to or mislead a person carrying out
a duty or function or exercising a power under
this Act;
(c) delay without justifiable cause the opening or
evaluation of tenders, the awarding of contract
beyond the prescribed period or payment of
contractors beyond contractual period and
contractual performance obligations;
(d) unduly influence or exert pressure on any
member of an opening committee evaluation
committee and disposal committee or on any
employee or agent of a procuring entity or the
accounting officer to take a particular action
which favours or tends to favour a particular
tenderer;
(e) open any sealed tender, including such tenders
electronically submitted and any document
required to be sealed, or divulge their contents
prior to the appointed time for the public opening
of the tender or documents except for tenders
inadvertently opened under section 76 (6);
(f) divulge confidential information under section
66;
(g) inappropriately influence tender evaluations;
(h) split procurements contrary to section 60 of the
Act;
(i) commit a fraudulent act;
(j)knowingly withholds the notification of award to a
successful tenderer;
(k) knowingly withholds notification to
unsuccessful tenderer;
(1) sign a contract contrary to the requirements of
this Act or Regulations made thereunder; or
(m) contravene a lawful order of the Authority given
under Part IV or the Review Board under Part
XV.

Prohibitions and
offences.

-- 111 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
(2) A person who contravenes the provisions of
subsection (1) of this section, commits an offence and shall
be liable upon conviction —
(a) if the person is a natural person, to a fine not
exceeding four million shillings or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten
years, or to both;
(b) if the person is a body corporate, to a fine not
exceeding ten million shillings.
(3) In addition to the penalty under subsection (2), a
state or public officer involved shall be subject to internal
disciplinary action while any other person who is not a
state or public officer shall be debarred.
(4) If a person or an employee or agent of a person
contravenes the provisions of this Act, the following shall
apply —
(a) the person shall be disqualified from entering into
a contract for the procurement; or
(b) if a contract has already been entered into with
the person, the contract shall be voidable at the
option of the procuring entity.
(5) A procuring entity may lodge a complaint with the
relevant professional body for the institution of disciplinary
proceedings against a contractor who is a member of a
professional body and who contravenes the provisions of
this Act.
(6) The penalties imposed by a professional body
pursuant to a complaint lodged under subsection (5) shall
apply in addition to any penalties that may be imposed
under this Act.
177. A person convicted of an offence under this Act
for which no penalty is provided shall be liable upon
conviction —
(a) if the person is a natural person, to a fine not
exceeding four million shillings or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years
or to both;
(b) if the person is a body corporate, to a fine not
exceeding ten million shillings.
No. 33
General penalty and
sanctions.

-- 112 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
178. (1) A person shall not, in his personal capacity,
be liable in civil or criminal proceedings in respect of any
act or omissions done in good faith in the performance of
his duties under this Act.
(2) The procuring entity shall indemnify an employee
or member of a board of a procuring entity who is a party
to a suit or a proceeding whether civil, criminal or
administrative in nature brought against him or her in
performance of his or her official functions in a
procurement or asset disposal proceeding:
Provided that employee or member of a board of a
procuring entity shall have engaged the services of a
private lawyer or external counsel and has not been
adjudged guilty of gross negligence, misconduct or grave
abuse of office.
PART XVII —POLICY OPERATIONALIZATION
AND REVIEW
179. (1) The National Treasury shall convene
meetings at least annually for the purpose of consulting
with persons in the public and private sectors who have an
interest in the proper functioning of the public procurement
and asset disposal system.
(2) The procedure for conducting a consultative
meeting referred to in subsection (1) shall be as prescribed.
180. The Cabinet Secretary shall make Regulations for
the better carrying out of the provisions of this Act and,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, may make
Regulations to facilitate the implementation of this Act, and
such regulations shall not take effect unless approved by
Parliament pursuant to the Statutory Instruments Act,
2013.
181. The Authority shall develop a Code of Ethics to
apply to every person on whom this act applies.
PART XVIII —REPEAL, TRANSITION AND
SAVINGS PROVISIONS
182. (1) The Public Procurement and Disposal Act,
2005 is repealed.
(2) Despite subsection (1), every order, direction or
appointment which was issued, given, or made pursuant to

Protection from
personal liability
and indemnity.
Consultative
meetings.
Making of
Regulations.
Code of Ethics.
Repeal of No. 3 of
2005 and savings.

-- 113 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
the provisions of the repealed Public Procurement and
Disposal Act, 2005, and every office created in pursuance
thereof shall remain valid until otherwise cancelled,
revoked, varied or abolished under the provisions of this
Act.
(3) For greater certainty a person who immediately
before the commencement date of this Act held or was
acting or was an employee or staff in a public office
established by the repealed Act, so far as is consistent with
this Act, shall continue to hold or act or work in that office
as if appointed to that position under this Act pursuant to
Article 31(2) of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.
(4) The Review Board established under the repealed
Act shall continue to exist and discharge its functions until
a new Review Board is constituted under this Act.
183. The transitional provisions specified in the Third
Schedule shall apply.
No. 33
Transitional
provisions.

-- 114 of 118 --

No. 33 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
Meetings.
Voting.
Chairperson and
Vice-chairperson.
Secretary.
Minutes.
FIRST SCHEDULE (s. 14(1))
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE CONDUCT OF
BUSINESS AND AFFAIRS OF THE BOARD
1. (1) The Board shall have at least four meetings in
every financial year and not more than four months shall
elapse between one meeting and the next meeting.
(2) Meetings shall be convened by the Chairperson
in consultation with the members.
(3) Unless three quarters of the members otherwise
agree, at least fourteen days' notice of a meeting shall be
given to every member.
(4) A meeting shall be presided over by the
Chairperson or in his absence by a person elected by the
Board at the meeting for that purpose.
2. A decision of the Board shall be by a majority of
the members present and voting and, in the case of an
equality of votes, the person presiding at the meeting
shall have a second or casting vote.
3. (1) The Board shall elect one of its nominated
members to be the Chairperson of the Board and another
of its nominated members to be its Vice-chairperson.
(2) Subject to an earlier resignation or termination,
the Chairperson and Vice-chairperson shall each hold
office until their current term as a member of the Board
expires.
4. The Director-General shall be the Secretary of the
Board.
5. Minutes of all meetings shall be kept and entered
in books kept for that purpose.

-- 115 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
SECOND SCHEDULE (s. 31(3))
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE CONDUCT OF
BUSINESS AND AFFAIRS OF THE REVIEW
BOARD
1. (1) The Review Board shall have at least four
meetings in every financial year and not more than four
months shall elapse between one meeting and the next
meeting.
(2) Meetings shall be convened by the Chairperson
in consultation with the members, or in their absence by
the Vice-chairperson.
(3) Unless three quarters of the members otherwise
agree, at least fourteen days' notice of a meeting shall be
given to every member.
(4) A meeting shall be presided over by the
Chairperson or in his absence by the Vice-chairperson or
in both their absences, by a person elected by the Board
at the meeting for that purpose.
2. A decision of the Review Board shall be by a
majority of the members present and voting and, in the
case of an equality of votes, the person presiding at the
meeting shall have a second or casting vote.
3. (1) The Review Board shall elect one of its
nominated members to be the Chairperson of the Review
Board and another of its nominated members to be its
Vice-chairperson.
(2) Subject to an earlier resignation or termination,
the Chairperson and Vice-chairperson shall each hold
office until their current term as a member of the Review
Board expires.
4. Minutes of all meetings shall be kept and entered
in books kept for that purpose.

-- 116 of 118 --

No. 33
Existing procurement
proceedings continued
under repealed Act.

Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 2015
THIRD SCHEDULE (s. 183)
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
1. (1) Procurement proceedings commenced before
the commencement date of this Act shall be continued in
accordance with the law applicable before the
commencement date of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of subparagraph (1), procurement
proceeding commences when the first advertisement
relating to the procurement proceeding is published or, if
there is no advertisement, when the first documents are
given to persons who wish to participate in the
procurement proceeding.
2. Section 66 of this Act shall apply with respect to
procurement proceedings completed before the
commencement date of this Act.
3. Section 67 of this Act shall apply with respect to —
Confidentiality in
relation to past
proceedings.
Records of past
procurements.
(a) a procurement that took place before the
commencement date of this Act; or
(b) a procurement, the procurement proceeding for ■
which was terminated before the commencement
date of this Act.
(2) Section 51(2) of the Act, as it applies under
subparagraph (1), does not require the record of a
procurement to include anything that was not required
before the commencement date of this Act.
Publication of existing 4. Section 67 of this Act shall apply with respect to acontracts.
contract formed before the commencement date of this Act
comes.
Amendments to existing 5. Section 130 of this Act shall apply with respect to a	contracts.
contract formed before the commencement date of this Act
but not to an amendment to such a contract made before the
commencement date of this Act.
6. Section 140 of this Act shall apply to contracts
formed before the commencement date of this Act and to
amounts under such contracts that became overdue before
the commencement date of this Act.
Interest on overdue
amounts under existing
contracts.

-- 117 of 118 --

2015 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal No. 33
Investigations,
Inspections,
Assessments, and Audits
relating to prior
contracts.
Administrative review,
etc. for existing
proceedings.
Continuation of existing
investigations.
7. Sections 43 of this Act shall apply to procurement
proceedings and contracts formed before the
commencement of this Act including contracts that are no
longer in force at the commencement date of this Act.
8. PARTS III and XV of this Act shall apply, with
necessary modifications, with respect to procurement and
disposal proceedings commenced before the
commencement date of this Act.
9. An investigation of procurement proceedings by the
Authority shall be continued under Part III and the
provisions of that Part shall apply, with necessary
modifications.
Grounds for debarment 10. The grounds for debarring a person from	include previous actions.
participating in procurement proceedings under section 41
of this Act extend to anything done before the
commencement date of this Act that would constitute a
ground under that section.
11. Regulations contemplated under this Act shall be
made within a period of one year immediately after the
effective date of the Act.
Time specification for
the regulations.

-- 118 of 118 --