LAWS OF KENYA
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT
CHAPTER 412A
Revised Edition 2022
Printed and Published by the Government Printer
Nairobi

-- 1 of 625 --

2 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
CHAPTER 412A
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Section
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Interpretation.
3. Object of this Act.
4. Declaration of entities as national government entities.
5. Declaration of entities as county government entities.
6. Act to prevail in certain matters.
PART II – PARLIAMENTARY
OVERSIGHT OF NATIONAL FINANCES
NONE
7. Responsibilities of the National Assembly budget committee in
public finance matters.
8. Responsibilities of the Senate budget committee in public finance
matters.
9. Parliamentary Budget Office continued.
10. Responsibilities of the Parliamentary Budget Office.
PART III – NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
RESPONSIBILITIES WITH RESPECT TO THE
MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF PUBLIC FINANCE
NONE
11. Establishment of the National Treasury.
12. General responsibilities of the National Treasury.
13. Powers of the National Treasury.
14. Secondment of public officers by National Treasury to County
Treasury.
15. The National Treasury to enforce fiscal responsibility principles.
16. National government deviation from financial objectives.
17. The National Treasury to administer the Consolidated Fund.
18. The National Treasury to administer the Equalisation Fund.
19. Source of the Contingencies Fund.
20. Cabinet Secretary to administer the Contingencies Fund.
21. Advances from the Contingencies Fund.
22. Cabinet Secretary to seek Parliamentary approval for payments
made from Contingencies Fund.
23. Financial statements in respect of the Contingencies Fund.

-- 2 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 3
24. Establishment of Parliamentary Fund and other national
government public funds.
25. National Treasury to prepare annual Budget Policy Statement.
26. National Treasury to prepare Budget Review and Outlook Paper.
27. Publication of pre- and post-election economic and fiscal reports
by National Treasury.
28. Banking arrangements for national government entities.
29. Management of cash at the national government level.
30. Procurement of goods and services.
31. Cabinet Secretary to report on all loans.
32. Cabinet Secretary to report on national government guarantees.
33. Cabinet Secretary to submit national government debt
management strategy to Parliament annually.
34. The National Treasury to provide Parliament with additional
reports when required.
35. Stages in the budget process.
36. Cabinet Secretary to manage budget process at national level.
37. Submission of budget estimates and related documents for
approval.
38. Submission of other budget documents to the National Assembly.
39. National Assembly to consider budget estimates.
39A. Submission, consideration and passing of Finance Bill.
40. Submission and consideration of budget policy highlights and the
Finance Bill in the National Assembly.
41. Deleted.
42. Consideration by Parliament of Bills allocating revenue and
additional allocations.
43. Limited powers of accounting officer of national government
entity to reallocate appropriate funds.
44. National government to submit supplementary budget to
Parliament.
45. Appropriations to lapse if unspent at the end of the financial year.
46. Overall responsibility of Cabinet Secretary.
47. Conditions for receiving grants and donations by national
government or its entities or third parties.
48. Regulations on grant administration.
49. Authority for borrowing by the national government.
50. Obligations and restrictions on national government
guaranteeing and borrowing.
51. Borrowing by national government entities.
52. Persons authorized to execute loan documents at national
government.
53. Issuance of securities by national government.
53A. Issuance of external securities by national government.

-- 3 of 625 --

4 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
54. Exemption from stamp duty.
55. Establishment of the office of Registrar of national government
securities.
56. Power of national government to enter into derivative
transactions.
57. Power of national government to lend money.
58. Power of Cabinet Secretary to guarantee loans.
59. Cabinet Secretary to submit a statement on loan guarantee to
Parliament.
59A. Cabinet Secretary to submit a report on credit guarantees to micro,
small and medium enterprises to Parliament.
60. Money payable in respect of a guarantee to be a charge on the
Consolidated Fund.
61. Recovery of amounts paid on a guarantee.
62. Establishment and objectives of the Public Debt Management
Office.
63. Functions of the Public Debt Management Office.
64. Role of Cabinet Secretary in Public Debt Management Office.
65. Relationship with county treasuries in debt management.
66. Accounting officers of Judiciary, Parliament, constitutional
commissions and independent offices.
67. Designation of accounting officers for national government.
68. Responsibilities of accounting officers for national government
entities, Parliament and the Judiciary.
69. Accounting officer of a national government entity may write-off
loss.
70. Spending authority of accounting officer.
71. Accounting officer for national government entity may make cash
advances.
72. Accounting officer to manage assets and liabilities of national
government entities.
73. National government entity to maintain internal auditing
arrangements.
74. Disciplinary measures against public and accounting officers.
75. Receivers and collectors of national government.
76. Receiver may authorise a public officer to be collector of national
government revenue.
77. Powers of the Cabinet Secretary to waive or vary tax, fees or
charges.
78. Kenya Revenue Authority to be collector of national government
revenue.
79. Public officers to comply with laws relating to national
government resources.

-- 4 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 5
80. The National Treasury to prepare consolidated annual financial
statement.
81. Annual reporting by accounting officers.
82. Annual reporting by receivers of revenue.
83. Accounting officer to prepare quarterly reports for national
government entity.
84. Administrators of national public funds to prepare annual
financial statements.
85. Quarterly reporting by administrators of national public funds.
86. Establishment and dissolution of a state corporation.
87. Restrictions on national government investing in government-
linked corporations.
88. Cabinet Secretary in charge of state corporation to monitor its
performance.
89. Annual reporting by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters
relating to public investments.
90. Parliament may extend time limit.
91. Definitions for purposes of sections 86, 87, 88 and 89.
92. Responsibility for avoiding, identifying and resolving financial
problems.
93. Assessment of the need for intervention in accordance with Article
225 of the Constitution.
94. Additional indicators of serious or persistent material breach.
95. Stoppage of funds process in national government entity.
96. Stoppage of funds process in county government.
97. Procedure for stoppage of funds.
98. Renewal of decision to stop funds and termination of stoppage.
99. Provision for a recovery plan.
100. Establishment of the Joint Intergovernmental Technical
Committee.
101. Termination of intervention.
PART IV – COUNTY GOVERNMENT
RESPONSIBILITIES WITH RESPECT TO
MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF PUBLIC FINANCE
102. County government responsibilities in public finance.
103. Establishment of county treasuries.
104. General responsibilities of a County Treasury.
105. Powers of a County Treasury.
106. Secondment of public officers by a County Treasury to the National
Treasury.
107. County Treasury to enforce fiscal responsibility principles.
108. County government deviation from financial objectives.

-- 5 of 625 --

6 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
109. Establishment of a County Revenue Fund for each county
government.
110. County Government Executive Committee may establish county
government Emergency Fund.
111. County Executive Committee member for finance to administer
the Emergency Fund.
112. Power of County Executive Committee member to make payments
from Emergency Fund.
113. Limitation on power of County Executive Committee member for
finance to make payments from Emergency Fund.
114. County Executive Committee member for finance to seek approval
for payments from Emergency Fund.
115. County Treasury to submit a report to Auditor-General in respect
to Emergency Fund.
116. Power to establish other county public funds.
117. County Treasury to prepare County Fiscal Strategy Paper.
118. County Treasury to prepare a County Budget Review and Outlook
Paper.
119. Banking arrangements for county government and its entities.
120. Management of cash at the county government level.
121. Procurement for county government entities.
122. County Treasury to maintain record of county government loans.
123. County Treasury to submit county government debt management
strategy to county assembly.
124. County Treasury to provide county assembly with additional
reports when required.
125. Stages in county government budget process.
126. County government to prepare development plan.
127. County government to prepare cash flow projections.
128. County Executive Committee member for finance to manage
budget process at county government level.
129. County Executive Committee member to submit budget estimates
and other documents to County Executive Committee for
approval.
130. County Executive Committee member for finance to submit
budget documents to county assembly.
131. County Assembly to consider budget estimates.
132. Submission and consideration of the revenue raising measures in
the county assembly.
133. Approval of the Finance Bill.
134. Action to be taken in case of delay in enacting County
Appropriation Bill.
135. County government to submit to county assembly supplementary
budget in certain circumstances.

-- 6 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 7
136. Appropriation of money for county government purpose to lapse
if unspent.
137. Establishment of County Budget and Economic Forum for county
budget consultation process.
138. Conditions for receiving grants and donations by county
government or its entities or third parties.
139. Regulations on grant administration.
140. Authority for borrowing by county governments.
141. Obligations and restrictions with respect to county government
borrowing.
142. Borrowing by county government entities.
143. Persons who are authorised to execute loan documents at county
government level.
144. County government may issue securities only if authorised by this
Act.
145. County government authorised to lend money.
146. County government joint infrastructure investment.
147. Role of accounting officers in management of public finances.
148. Designation of accounting officers for county government entities
by the County Executive Committee Member for finance.
149. Responsibilities of accounting officers designated for county
government entities.
150. Accounting officer of a county government entity may write off
any loss.
151. Spending authority of accounting officer.
152. Power of accounting officers for county entities to make cash
advances.
153. Accounting officer to be responsible for managing assets and
liabilities of county government entity.
154. Limited power of accounting officer to reallocate appropriated
funds.
155. County government entity to maintain internal auditing
arrangements.
156. Disciplinary measures against public and accounting officers.
157. Designation of receivers of county government revenue.
158. Receiver may authorise public officer to be collector of revenue.
159. Powers of County Executive Committee member for finance to
waive or vary tax, fees or charges.
160. Kenya Revenue Authority may be appointed collector.
161. County government revenue raising measures to conform to
Article 209(5) of the Constitution.
162. Obligations of public officers with respect to county government
resources.
163. County government to prepare annual financial statement.

-- 7 of 625 --

8 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
164. Annual reporting by accounting officers.
165. Annual reporting by receivers of revenue.
166. Accounting officer to prepare quarterly reports for county
government entity.
167. Annual reporting by Administrators of county public funds.
168. Quarterly reporting by administrators of county public funds.
169. Application of this part to urban areas and cities.
170. Accounting Officer of urban area or city.
171. Urban area or city accounting officer responsibilities in revenue
management.
172. Financing of urban areas or cities.
173. Criteria for allocating funds to urban areas or cities by county
governments.
174. Principles to be observed by urban areas or cities in managing
public finances.
175. Budget and budget process for urban areas or cities.
176. Response to delays in approval of annual budgets by urban areas
or cities.
177. Borrowing by urban areas or cities.
178. Conditions in which urban areas or cities may receive grants.
179. Urban areas or cities bank accounts.
180. Reporting by urban areas or cities.
181. Transitional arrangements.
182. Establishment and dissolution of county corporations.
183. Restrictions on county government investing in county
government-linked corporations.
184. Responsibility for monitoring financial performance of county
corporations.
185. Annual reporting by the County Treasury on county corporations.
186. Definitions for purposes of sections 182, 183 and 184.
PART V – RELATIONS BETWEEN NATIONAL
AND COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ON
BUDGET AND ECONOMIC MATTERS
NONE
187. Establishment, purpose and composition of the
Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council.
188. Vacation of office by a member.
189. The process of sharing revenue.
190. Recommendations of the Commission on Revenue Allocation.
191. Bills allocating revenue and additional allocations.
191A. Intergovernmental agreements.
191B. Public participation.
191C. Execution of agreement for conditional allocation.

-- 8 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 9
191D. Submission to Senate.
191E. Requisition of funds.
PART VI – PUBLIC SECTOR
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD
192. Establishment of the Board.
193. Composition of the Board.
194. Functions of the Board.
195. Vacation of office and remuneration of Board members.
PART VII – ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
196. Offences by public officers.
197. Offences of financial misconduct.
198. Other offences by public officers.
199. Penalties for offences.
200. Duty of Principal Secretary to report suspected offences to
relevant law enforcement authority for investigation.
201. Duty of County Chief Officer to report suspected offences.
202. Liability of public officer for certain losses sustained by national
government.
203. Liability of public officer for certain losses sustained by county
government.
204. Cabinet Secretary may impose institutional sanctions on national
government entities.
PART VIII – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
205. Powers of the Cabinet Secretary to make regulations.
206. Protection of public officers from liability.
207. Public participation.
208. Repeal of certain Acts.
209. Spent.
210. Savings and transitional provisions.
SECOND SCHEDULE — SAVINGS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

-- 9 of 625 --

10 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
CHAPTER 412A
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT
Commencement: 27th August, 2012
9th March 2013 — Provisions relating to county governments under this Act
An Act of Parliament to provide for the effective management of
public finances by the national and county governments; the oversight
responsibility of Parliament and county assemblies; the different
responsibilities of government entities and other bodies, and for connected
purposes
[Act No. 18 of 2012, Act No. 34 of 2013, Act No. 6 of 2014, Act No. 15 of 2014, Act No. 16 of 2014, Act
No. 38 of 2016, Act No. 15 of 2017, Act No. 18 of 2018, Act No. 12 of 2019, Act No. 1 of 2020, Act No. 13
of 2020, Act No. 16 of 2020, Act No. 9 of 2021, Act No. 17 of 2022, Act No. 12 of 2023, Act No. 3 of 2024.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Short title and commencement.
1. (1) This Act shall be cited as the Public Finance Management Act.
(2) Spent.
Interpretation.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
“accounting officer” means—
(a) an accounting officer of a national government entity referred to in section 67;
(b) an accounting officer of a county government entity referred to in section 148;
(c) in the case of the Judiciary, the Chief Registrar of the Judiciary; or
(d) in the case of the Parliamentary Service Commission—
(i) the Clerk of the Senate in respect of the Senate;
(ii) the Clerk of the National Assembly in respect of the National Assembly;
and
(iii) such other officer in the parliamentary service in respect of any other office
in the parliamentary service as the Cabinet Secretary shall, upon resolution
by the Commission, designate, within fourteen days of the resolution;
“Accounting Standards Board” means the Public Sector Accounting Standards
Board established under section 192;
“appropriation” means—
(a) authority granted by Parliament to pay money out of the Consolidated Fund
or out of any other public fund; or
(b) authority granted by a county assembly to pay money out of the relevant
County Revenue Fund or out of any other county public fund;

-- 10 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 11
“appropriation Act” means an Act of Parliament or of a county assembly that
provides for the provision of money to pay for the supply of services;
“authorised officer”—
(a) in relation to the National Treasury, means any of its members or officers
authorised by the National Treasury in accordance with section 13; or
(b) in relation to a County Treasury, means any of its officers authorised by the
County Treasury in accordance with section 105;
“borrower” means a person to whom a loan has been or is to be made;
“Budget Policy Statement”, in relation to a financial year, means the Budget
Policy Statement referred to in section 25;
“Cabinet Secretary” means the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters
relating to finance;
“chart of account” means a structured list of accounts used to classify and
record budget revenue and expenditure transactions as well as government assets
and liabilities on a standard budget classifications system;
“Chief Officer” means the person appointed by the County Governor to
administer the County department responsible for financial affairs;
“collector of revenue”—
(a) in relation to the national government, means a person authorised under
section 76 to be a collector of revenue for the national government;
(b) in relation to a county government, means a person authorised under section
158 to be a collector of revenue for that county government;
“commitment” means entering into a contract or other binding arrangement
under which expenses or liabilities may be incurred;
“Contingencies Fund” means the Contingencies Fund established by Article
208(1) of the Constitution;
“county corporation” means a public corporation within a county established
by an Act of Parliament or county legislation;
“County Emergency Fund” means a Fund established under section 110;
“County Exchequer Account” means a County Exchequer Account referred to
in section 109;
“County Executive Committee member for finance” means the member of a
County Executive Committee responsible for the financial affairs of the County and
for the County Treasury;
“County Fiscal Strategy Paper”, in relation to a county government, means the
County Fiscal Strategy Paper referred to in section 117;
“county government entity” means any department or agency of a county
government, and any authority, body or other entity declared to be a county
government entity under section 5(1);

-- 11 of 625 --

12 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
“county government revenue” means all money derived by or on behalf of a
county government from levies, rates, fees, charges or any other source authorised
by the Constitution or an Act of Parliament;
“county government security” means a security issued by the county
government under section 144 and includes a treasury bill, treasury bond, treasury
note, government stock and any other debt instrument issued by the county
government;
“County Debt” means all financial obligations attendant to loans raised and
securities issued by the county government;
“County Treasury” means a County Treasury established under section 103;
“development expenditure” means the expenditure for the creation or renewal
of assets;
“development partner” means a foreign government, an international
organisation of states or any other organisation prescribed by regulations for the
purpose of this Act;
“external government security” means a national government security which
is issued outside Kenya;
“external loan” means any loan governed by the laws of a jurisdiction other than
Kenya;
“financial objectives” means the financial objectives set out in a Budget Policy
Statement of the national government or in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper of the
county governments;
“financial obligation” means outstanding liabilities related to public debt,
including principal, interest, fees, commissions and other expenses incidental to the
raising of public debt or its repayment and shall be a charge on the Consolidated
Fund or another public fund established by the national government or any of its
entities;
“financial statements”, in relation to a financial year or other accounting period
of the national government, county government, or a national government or county
government entity, means—
(a) the financial statements referred to in Part III and Part IV of this Act; and
(b) the financial statements prescribed by the Accounting Standards Board;
“fiscal responsibility principles” means the principles of public finance
specified in Article 201 of the Constitution, together with—
(a) the principles of fiscal responsibility referred to in section 15, in relation to
national government; and
(b) the principles of fiscal responsibility referred to in section 107, in relation to
a county government;
“Government to government loan” means any loan that is negotiated with
or covered by any government or national government entity including any
government Export Credit Agency (ECA) or investment insurance agency or financial

-- 12 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 13
institution that acts as an intermediary between the Government and exporters
to facilitate export financing, whether by means of buyer or supplier credit, credit
insurance, financial intermediary loans, guarantees, Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) tied-aid credit or officially supported export
credit depending on the mandate granted to such export credit agency by the
relevant government for the purpose of facilitating trade and investment between
the two countries;
“Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council” means the Council
established under section 187;
“internal auditing” means an independent, objective assurance and consulting
activity designed to add value and improve an organisation’s operations, which
helps an organisation accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined
approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control,
and governance processes;
“Islamic finance return” has the same meaning assigned to it under section 2
of the Income Tax Act;
“loan” means any borrowing with or without interest from any source or any
issuance of a national government security;
"medium enterprise" means a firm, trade, service, industry or business
activity—
(a) whose annual turnover is between five million shillings and one hundred
million shillings;
(b) which employs between fifty one and two hundred and fifty employees;
(c) whose total assets and financial investment shall be as determined by the
Cabinet Secretary from time to time and includes—
(i) the manufacturing sector, where the investment in plant and machinery
or the registered capital of the enterprise does not exceed two hundred and
fifty million shillings; and
(ii) the service sector and farming enterprises, where the investment in
equipment or registered capital of the enterprise does not exceed one hundred
and twenty-five million shillings;
“medium term” means a period of not less than three years but not more than
five years;
"micro enterprise" has the meaning assigned to it in section 2 of the Micro and
Small Enterprises Act (Cap. 499C);
“National Exchequer Account” means the National Exchequer Account
referred to in section 17;
“national government entity” includes any department or agency of the
national government and any authority, body or other entity declared to be a
national government entity under section 4(1);

-- 13 of 625 --

14 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
“national government revenue” means all taxes imposed by the national
government under Articles 206(1)(a) and (b) and 209 of the Constitution, excluding
county government revenue;
“national government security” means a security issued by the national
government under section 53 or section 53A and a treasury bill, treasury bond,
Sukuk, treasury note, government stock and any other debt instrument issued by the
national government;
“National Treasury” means the National Treasury established by section 11;
“Principal Secretary”, in relation to the National Treasury, means the person
responsible for the administration of the National Treasury;
“public debt” has the meaning assigned to it under Article 214(2) of the
Constitution;
“public money” includes—
(a) all money that comes into possession of, or is distributed by, a national
government entity and money raised by a private body where it is doing so under
statutory authority; and
(b) money held by national government entities in trust for third parties and any
money that can generate liability for the Government;
“publicise”, in relation to a document, means to make known to the public,
through the national or local media—
(a) the general nature of the document; and
(b) how and where it may be accessed and read by members of the public;
“publish”, in relation to a document, includes—
(a) publishing the document in a newspaper, Government Gazette or other
publication of general circulation in Kenya; or
(b) publication of an abridged or summary versions of the documents without
loosing the core content of the document; or
(c) making the document available for reference at public libraries or offices of
national government entities or in archives of those institutions; or
(d) posting the document on the internet on a Government website; or
(e) if the document relates only to a county government or any of its entities—
(i) publishing the document in a newspaper or other publication of general
circulation in the County;
(ii) making the document available for reference at public libraries or offices
of the county government or those entities; or
(iii) posting the document on the Internet on a county government website;
“receiver of revenue”—
(a) in relation to the National government, means a person designated to be a
receiver of revenue under section 75;

-- 14 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 15
(b) in relation to the county government, means a person designated to be a
receiver of revenue under section 157;
“recurrent expenditure”—
(a) in relation to the national government, means the expenditure that is incurred
in operating the services provided by the national government; and
(b) in relation to a county government, means the expenditure that is incurred in
operating the services provided by that county government,
but does not include expenditure incurred in creating or renewing assets
belonging to or managed by that government;
“regulations” means regulations made under this Act;
“short term borrowing” means borrowing by a government by way of Treasury
Bills, bank-overdraft or other instrument to cover temporary cash shortfalls and is
repayable within twelve months;
"small enterprise" has the meaning assigned to in section 2 of the Micro and
Small Enterprises Act (Cap. 499C);
“Sukuk” means certificates of equal value, representing undivided shares in
ownership of tangible or intangible assets, usufruct of assets; services or an
investment activity, structured in conformity with Islamic law;
“Treasury Single Account”—
(a) in relation to the national government, means a centralised bank account
system where all deposits and payment transactions are processed for
State Departments, Commissions and Independent Offices, and any national
government entity which draws directly from the Consolidated Fund;
(b) in relation to the county government, means a centralised bank account
system established in each county where all deposits and payment transactions
are processed for county departments and any other county entity which draws
directly from the County Revenue Fund;
“Urban Board” means a city or municipal board within the meaning of the Urban
Areas and Cities Act (Cap. 275);
“vote” means money authorised by an appropriation Act for withdrawal from the
Consolidated Fund or a County Revenue Fund; and
“wasteful expenditure” means any expenditure that was incurred which could
have been avoided had due care and diligence been exercised.
(2) Terms used in this Act which are also used in the Constitution have the same
meaning as they have in the Constitution.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, the reference to the term 'interest' in relation
to a national government security shall also apply to reference to Islamic finance
return on Sukuk.
[Act No. 6 of 2014, s. 2, Act No. 16 of 2014, s. 39, Act No. 15 of 2017, s. 47,
Act No. 12 of 2019, Sch., Act No. 16 of 2020, s. 2, Act No. 12 of 2023, s. 2.]

-- 15 of 625 --

16 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Object of this Act.
3. The object of this Act is to ensure that—
(a) public finances are managed at both the national and the county levels of
government in accordance with the principles set out in the Constitution;
and
(b) public officers who are given responsibility for managing the finances are
accountable to the public for the management of those finances through
Parliament and County Assemblies.
Declaration of entities as national government entities.
4. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may, with the approval of the Cabinet and
Parliament, by order in the Gazette, declare a state corporation, an authority or any
other body whose functions fall under the national government to be a national
government entity for the purposes of this Act.
(2) A declaration made under subsection (1) shall be based on criteria prescribed
by regulations.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall, from time to time, and not less than once each
year, publish in the Gazette a list of national entities declared under subsection (1).
(4) The Cabinet Secretary may, from time to time with the approval of the Cabinet
and Parliament, by order in the Gazette, declare that a national government entity
declared under subsection (1) shall, with effect from the date of the order, cease to
be a national government entity for the purposes of this Act.
Declaration of entities as county government entities.
5. (1) A County Executive Committee member for finance may, with the approval
of the county executive committee and county assembly, by order in the Gazette,
declare a county corporation, an authority or any other body whose functions fall
under that county government to be a county government entity for the purposes
of this Act.
(2) A declaration made under subsection (1) shall be based on criteria prescribed
by regulations.
(3) A County Executive Committee member for finance shall, from time to time,
and not less than once each year, publish in the Gazette a list of the county entities
declared under subsection (1).
(4) A County Executive Committee member for finance may, from time to time
with the approval of the county assembly, and by notice in the Gazette declare that
a county government entity declared under subsection (1) shall with effect from the
date of the order cease to be a county government entity for the purposes of this Act.
Act to prevail in certain matters.
6. This Act shall prevail in the case of any inconsistency between this Act and
any other legislation, on the following matters—
(a) preparation and submission of budget estimates, including the time for
doing so;

-- 16 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 17
(b) preparation and submission of accounts for audit, including the time for
doing so;
(c) borrowing, lending and loan guarantees;
(d) raising of revenue and making of expenditures;
(e) banking arrangements, including opening of bank accounts and
investment of moneys;
(f) establishment and management of public funds; and
(g) establishment and dissolution of state corporations.
PART II – PARLIAMENTARY OVERSIGHT OF NATIONAL FINANCES
Responsibilities of Committees of Parliament
Responsibilities of the National Assembly budget committee in public finance
matters.
7. The committee of the National Assembly established to deal with budgetary
matters has responsibility for the following matters, in addition to the functions set
out in the Standing Orders—
(a) discuss and review the Budget Policy Statement and budget estimates and
make recommendations to the National Assembly;
(b) provide general direction on budgetary matters;
(c) monitor all budgetary matters falling within the competence of the
National Assembly under this Act and report on those matters to the
National Assembly;
(d) monitor adherence by Parliament, the Judiciary and the national
government and its entities to the principles of public finance and others
set out in the Constitution, and to the fiscal responsibility principles of
this Act;
(e) review the Division of Revenue Bill presented to Parliament and ensure
that it reflects the principles under Articles 187(2)(a), 201 and 203 of the
Constitution;
(f) examine financial statements and other documents submitted to the
National Assembly under Part III of this Act and make recommendations
to the National Assembly for improving the management of Kenya’s public
finances;
(g) in accordance with Articles 114, 218 and 221 of the Constitution—
(i) make recommendations to the National Assembly on “money Bills”,
after taking into account the views of the Cabinet Secretary; and
(ii) table in the National Assembly a report containing the views of the
Cabinet Secretary in subparagraph (i); and
(h) introduce the Appropriations Bill in the National Assembly.

-- 17 of 625 --

18 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Responsibilities of the Senate budget committee in public finance matters.
8. (1) The Committee of the Senate established to deal with budgetary and
financial matters has responsibilities for the following matters, in addition to the
functions set out in the Standing Orders—
(a) present to the Senate, subject to the exceptions in the Constitution, the
proposal for the basis of allocating revenue among the Counties and
consider any bill dealing with county financial matters;
(b) review the County Allocation of Revenue Bill and the Division of Revenue
Bill in accordance with Article 218(1)(b) of the Constitution at least two
months before the end of the financial year;
(c) examine financial statements and other documents submitted to the
Senate under Part IV of this Act, and make recommendations to the Senate
for improving the management of government’s public finances; and
(d) monitor adherence by the Senate to the principles of public finance set out
in the Constitution, and to the fiscal responsibility principles of this Act.
(2) In carrying out its functions under subsection (1)(a) and (b), the
Committee shall consider recommendations from the Commission on Revenue
Allocation, County Executive Committee member responsible for finance, the
Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council, the public and any other
interested persons or groups.
Parliamentary Budget Office
Parliamentary Budget Office continued.
9. (1) The office known as the Parliamentary Budget Office shall continue to
exist as an office of the Parliamentary Service.
(2) In addition to any other criteria established by the Parliamentary Service
Commission, the Budget Office shall consist of persons appointed on merit by virtue
of their experience in finance, economics and public policy matters.
Responsibilities of the Parliamentary Budget Office.
10. (1) The Parliamentary Budget Office shall—
(a) provide professional services in respect of budget, finance, and economic
information to the committees of Parliament;
(b) prepare reports on budgetary projections and economic forecasts and
make proposals to Committees of Parliament responsible for budgetary
matters;
(c) prepare analyses of specific issues, including financial risks posed by
Government policies and activities to guide Parliament;
(d) consider budget proposals and economic trends and make
recommendations to the relevant committee of Parliament with respect to
those proposals and trends;

-- 18 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 19
(e) establish and foster relationships with the National Treasury, county
treasuries and other national and international organisations, with
an interest in budgetary and socio-economic matters as it considers
appropriate for the efficient and effective performance of its functions;
(f) subject to Article 35 of the Constitution, ensure that all reports and other
documents produced by the Parliamentary Budget Office are prepared,
published and publicised not later than fourteen days after production;
and
(g) report to the relevant committees of Parliament on any Bill that is
submitted to Parliament that has an economic and financial impact,
making reference to the fiscal responsibility principles and to the financial
objectives set out in the relevant Budget Policy Statement; and
(h) propose, where necessary, alternative fiscal framework in respect of any
financial year.
(2) In carrying out its functions under subsection (1), the Parliamentary Budget
Office shall observe the principle of public participation in budgetary matters.
PART III – NATIONAL GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITIES WITH
RESPECT TO THE MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF PUBLIC FINANCE
Establishment of the National Treasury
Establishment of the National Treasury.
11. (1) There is established, pursuant to Article 225 of the Constitution, an entity
of the national government to be known as the National Treasury.
(2) The National Treasury shall comprise of—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary;
(b) the Principal Secretary; and
(c) the department or departments, office or offices of the National Treasury
responsible for economic and financial matters.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall be the head of the National Treasury.
General responsibilities of the National Treasury.
12. (1) Subject to the Constitution and this Act, the National Treasury shall—
(a) formulate, implement and monitor macro-economic policies involving
expenditure and revenue;
(b) manage the level and composition of public debt, guarantees and other
financial obligations of government within the framework of this Act and
develop a framework for sustainable debt control;
(c) formulate, evaluate and promote economic and financial policies that
facilitate social and economic development in conjunction with other
national government entities;

-- 19 of 625 --

20 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(d) mobilise domestic and external resources for financing national and
county government budgetary requirements;
(e) design and prescribe an efficient financial management system for
the national and county governments to ensure transparent financial
management and standard financial reporting as contemplated by Article
226 of the Constitution:
Provided that the National Treasury shall prescribe regulations that ensure
that operations of a system under this paragraph respect and promote the
distinctiveness of the national and county levels of government;
(f) in consultation with the Accounting Standards Board, ensure that uniform
accounting standards are applied by the national government and its
entities;
(g) develop policy for the establishment, management, operation and winding
up of public funds;
(h) within the framework of this Act and taking into consideration the
recommendations of the Commission on Revenue Allocation and the
Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council, prepare the legislative
proposals on annual Division of Revenue and County Allocation of
Revenue;
(i) strengthen financial and fiscal relations between the national government
and county governments and encourage support for county governments
in terms of Article 190(1) of the Constitution in performing their functions;
and
(j) assist county governments to develop their capacity for efficient, effective
and transparent financial management in consultation with the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for matters relating to intergovernmental relations.
(2) The National Treasury shall have the following functions, in addition to those
in subsection (1)—
(a) promote transparency, effective management and accountability with
regard to public finances in the national government;
(b) ensure proper management and control of, and accounting for the finances
of the government and its entities in order to promote the efficient and
effective use of budgetary resources;
(c) co-ordinate the preparation of annual appropriation accounts and other
statutory financial reports by the national government and its entities;
(d) prepare annual estimates of revenue of the national government, and co-
ordinate the preparation of the budget of the national government;
(e) consolidate reports of annual appropriation accounts and other financial
statements of the national government and county governments and their
entities;

-- 20 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 21
(f) report every four months to the National Assembly on the implementation
of the annual national budget on areas not reported on by the Controller
of Budget;
(g) be the custodian of an inventory of national government assets except as
may be provided by other legislation or the Constitution;
(h) monitor the management of the finances of public enterprises and
investments by the national government and its entities;
(i) monitor the financial aspects of risk management strategies and
governance structures for the national government and national
government entities;
(j) monitor the financial performance of state corporations; and
(k) issue guidelines to national government entities with respect to financial
matters and monitoring their implementation and compliance.
(3) The National Treasury shall take such other action, not inconsistent with the
Constitution, as will further the implementation of this Act.
[Act No. 6 of 2014, s. 3, Act No. 12 of 2023, s. 3.]
Powers of the National Treasury.
13. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may generally give to the National Treasury such
powers as are necessary to facilitate the Cabinet Secretary and national government
to exercise their powers in the Constitution, and in particular, the National Treasury
may do all or any of the following—
(a) with prior notification to the entity, access any system of public financial
management and control of national government entity;
(b) where reasonably necessary in the execution, of its functions, access the
premises of any national State Organ or other public entity and inspect
the entity’s records and other documents relating to financial matters after
giving notice;
(c) require national government entities to comply with any specified
applicable norms or standards regarding accounting practices and budget
classification systems;
(d) require any public officer in the national government to provide
information and if necessary, explanations with respect to matters
concerning public finance:
Provided that a person providing information shall not be liable if at
the time of providing the information that person, in writing, objected
to providing such information on grounds that the information may
incriminate him or her;
(e) provide any County Treasury with any information as it may require to
carry out its responsibilities under the Constitution and this Act; and
(f) perform any other act as the Cabinet Secretary may consider necessary
including power to intervene where a state entity or state organ fails

-- 21 of 625 --

22 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
to operate a financial system that complies with requirements provided
for under this Act or is in serious material breach under this Act or in
accordance with Articles 190 and 225 of the Constitution.
(2) The National Treasury may authorise any of its officers in writing to carry
out a responsibility or exercise a power specified in the authorisation on behalf of
the National Treasury.
(3) When acting in terms of subsection (2), an authorised officer, if requested by
the person in relation to whom the responsibility or power is being carried out or
exercised, shall produce the authorisation for inspection and failure to comply with
that request invalidates any subsequent action purporting to be taken in terms of
the authorisation.
(4) An authorisation given under subsection (2) remains in force for a period
specified in it or, if no period is specified, until it is revoked by the National Treasury.
(5) The National Treasury may, in writing, revoke or vary an authorisation given
under subsection (2).
Secondment of public officers by National Treasury to County Treasury.
14. (1) Subject to Articles 189 and 190 of the Constitution, the National Treasury
may, upon request by the County Treasury, and for a period that shall be agreed,
second to a County Treasury for purposes of capacity building, such number of
officers as may be necessary for the County Treasury to better carry out its functions
under this Act.
(2) A public officer seconded to a County Treasury under subsection (1), shall
be deemed to be an officer of the County Treasury and shall be subject only to the
direction and control of the County Treasury.
The National Treasury to enforce fiscal responsibility principles.
15. (1) The National Treasury shall manage the national government’s
public finances in accordance with the Constitution, and the principles of fiscal
responsibility set out in subsection (2).
(2) In managing the national government’s public finances, the National
Treasury shall enforce the following fiscal responsibility principles—
(a) over the medium term a minimum of thirty percent of the national
and county governments budget shall be allocated to the development
expenditure.
(b) the national government’s expenditure on wages and benefits for its public
officers shall not exceed a percentage of the national government revenue
as prescribed by regulations;
(c) over the medium term, the national government’s borrowings shall be used
only for the purpose of financing development expenditure and not for
recurrent expenditure;
(d) public debt and obligations shall be maintained at a sustainable level
as approved by Parliament for the national government and the county
assembly for county government;

-- 22 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 23
(e) fiscal risks shall be managed prudently; and
(f) a reasonable degree of predictability with respect to the level of tax rates
and tax bases shall be maintained, taking into account any tax reforms that
may be made in the future.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(c), short term borrowing shall be restricted
to management of cash flows and in case of a bank overdraft facility it shall not
exceed five per cent of the most recent audited national government revenue.
(4) The National Treasury shall ensure that the level of public debt does not
exceed the level specified annually in the medium term national government debt
management strategy submitted to Parliament.
(5) Regulations made under this Act may add to the list of fiscal principles set
out in subsection (2).
[Act No. 12 of 2023, s. 4.]
National government deviation from financial objectives.
16. (1) The national government may, with the approval of Parliament, deviate
from the financial objectives in a Budget Policy Statement on a temporary basis
where such deviation is necessitated by a major natural disaster or other significant
unforeseen event.
(2) If there is a change of national government, the new government may, with
the approval of Parliament, deviate from the financial objectives in a Budget Policy
Statement but shall not deviate from the fiscal responsibility principles.
(3) The National Treasury shall provide a report to Parliament regarding the
deviation, and shall include in the report—
(a) the reasons for and the implications of the deviation;
(b) proposals to address the deviation;
(c) the period the deviation is estimated to last; and
(d) the status of development projects initiated by the national government
and if any project has been stopped, the reasons for doing so.
(4) The National Treasury shall publish and publicise the report made under
subsection (3) within fifteen days after its submission to Parliament.
Responsibilities of the National Treasury with respect to national public funds
The National Treasury to administer the Consolidated Fund.
17. (1) The National Treasury shall administer the Consolidated Fund in
accordance with Article 206 of the Constitution.
(2) The National Treasury shall maintain the Consolidated Fund in an account
to be known as the National Exchequer Account, kept at the Central Bank of Kenya
and shall, subject to Article 206(1) of the Constitution—
(a) facilitate payment into that account all money raised or received by or on
behalf of the national government; and

-- 23 of 625 --

24 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) pay from that National Exchequer Account without undue delay all
amounts that are payable for public services.
(3) The National Treasury shall ensure that the National Exchequer Account is
not overdrawn at any time.
(4) Where a withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund is authorised under the
Constitution or an Act of Parliament for the appropriation of money, the National
Treasury shall make a requisition for the withdrawal and submit it to the Controller
of Budget for approval.
(5) The approval of a withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund by the Controller
of Budget, together with written instructions from the National Treasury requesting
for the withdrawal, shall be sufficient authority for the Central Bank of Kenya to pay
amounts from the National Exchequer Account in accordance with the approval and
instructions provided.
(6) The National Treasury shall, at the beginning of every month, and in any
event not later than the fifteenth day from the commencement of the month,
disburse monies to county governments for the expenditure of the following month.
(7) The disbursement referred to in subsection (6) shall be done in accordance
with a schedule prepared by the National Treasury in consultation with the
Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council, with the approval of the Senate,
and published in the Gazette, as approved, not later than the 30th May in every year.
[Act No. 34 of 2013, s. 14.]
The National Treasury to administer the Equalisation Fund.
18. (1) The National Treasury shall administer the Equalisation Fund in
accordance with Article 204 of the Constitution.
(2) The National Treasury shall keep the Equalisation Fund in a separate account
maintained at the Central Bank of Kenya and shall—
(a) transfer into that Equalisation Fund all revenues payable into the Fund
under Article 204(1) of the Constitution; and
(b) transfer from that Equalisation Fund, without undue delay, all money for
purposes specified in Article 204(2) of the Constitution.
(3) The National Treasury shall ensure that the Equalisation Fund Account is not
overdrawn at any time.
(4) Where a withdrawal from the Equalisation Fund is authorised under an Act of
Parliament that approves the appropriation of money, the National Treasury shall
make a requisition for the withdrawal and submit it to the Controller of Budget for
approval.
(5) The approval by the Controller of Budget of a withdrawal from the
Equalisation Fund, together with written instructions from the National Treasury
requesting for the withdrawal, shall be sufficient authority for the Central Bank of
Kenya to pay amounts from the Equalisation Fund Account in accordance with the
approval and instructions given.

-- 24 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 25
(6) Any unutilised balances in the Equalisation Fund shall not lapse at the end
of the Financial year, but shall be retained for use for the purposes for which the
Equalisation Fund was established.
Source of the Contingencies Fund.
19. The Contingencies Fund shall consist of monies appropriated from the
Consolidated Fund by an appropriation Act in any financial year.
Cabinet Secretary to administer the Contingencies Fund.
20. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall administer the Contingencies Fund.
(2) The permanent capital of the Contingencies Fund shall not exceed ten billion
shillings or such other amount as may be prescribed by the Cabinet Secretary with
the approval of Parliament.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall keep the Contingencies Fund in a separate
account, maintained at the Central Bank of Kenya and shall pay—
(a) into that account all monies appropriated to the Contingencies Fund by an
appropriation Act; and
(b) from the Contingencies Fund, without undue delay, all advances made
under section 21.
Advances from the Contingencies Fund.
21. (1) Subject to section 22, the Cabinet Secretary may make advances from the
Contingencies Fund if, on the basis of the set criteria and the process and operational
guidelines of Article 208(1) as prescribed in regulations approved by Parliament and
the laws relating to disaster management, the Cabinet Secretary is satisfied that an
urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure has arisen for which there is no specific
legislative authority.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), there is an urgent need for expenditure if
the Cabinet Secretary, guided by regulations and relevant laws, establishes that—
(a) the payment which was not budgeted for because it was unforeseen and
cannot be delayed until a later financial year without harming the general
public interest; and
(b) the event was unforeseen.
(3) In addition to regulations and relevant laws, and for the purposes of this
section, an unforeseen event is one which—
(a) threatens serious damage to human life or welfare;
(b) threatens serious damage to the environment; and
(c) is meant to alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering caused directly
by the event.
(4) An event threatens damage to human life or welfare under subsection (3)(a)
only if it involves, causes or may cause—
(a) loss of life, human illness or injury;

-- 25 of 625 --

26 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) homelessness or damage to property;
(c) disruption of food, water or shelter; or
(d) disruption to services, including health services.
(5) Subject to subsection (2), the Cabinet Secretary shall, by regulations and with
Parliament approval, prescribe the criteria for making advance under subsection (1).
Cabinet Secretary to seek Parliamentary approval for payments made from
Contingencies Fund.
22. (1) Not later than two months after a payment from the Contingencies Fund
in terms of section 21, the Cabinet Secretary shall submit to Parliament a detailed
report in respect of the payment setting out the information specified in section
23(2) and seek Parliament to approve the payment.
(2) If Parliament does not sit during the period referred to in subsection (1), or
is not sitting at the end of that period and the Cabinet Secretary has not sought the
approval of Parliament before the end of that period, the Cabinet Secretary shall seek
the approval for the payment not later than fourteen days after Parliament next sits.
(3) As soon as practicable after the Parliament has approved the payment, the
Cabinet Secretary shall cause an appropriation Bill to be introduced in Parliament for
the appropriation of the money paid and for the replenishment of the Contingencies
Fund to the extent of the amount of the payment.
Financial statements in respect of the Contingencies Fund.
23. (1) Not later than three months after the end of each financial year,
the National Treasury shall prepare and submit to the Auditor-General financial
statements for that year in respect of the Contingencies Fund.
(2) The National Treasury shall include the following information in the financial
statements submitted under subsection (1)—
(a) the date and amount of each payment made from that Contingencies Fund;
(b) the person to whom the payment was made;
(c) the purpose for which the payment was made;
(d) if the person to whom the payment was made has spent the money for that
purpose, a statement to that effect;
(e) if the person to whom the payment was made has not yet spent the money
for that purpose, a statement specifying the reasons for not having done
so; and
(f) a statement indicating how the payment conforms to section 21.
Establishment of Parliamentary Fund and other national government public
funds.
24. (1) There is established a fund to be known as the Parliamentary Fund.
(2) The Secretary to the Parliamentary Service Commission shall, on the
directions of the Commission, open and operate such bank accounts as may be
necessary for the purposes of the Parliamentary Fund.

-- 26 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 27
(2A) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), the Parliamentary
Service Commission may, with the approval of the National Assembly, establish the
following public funds—
(a) Parliamentary Mortgage (Members) Scheme Fund;
(b) Parliamentary Mortgage (Staff) Scheme Fund;
(c) Parliamentary Car Loan (Members) Scheme Fund;
(d) Parliamentary Car Loan (Staff) Scheme Fund; and
(e) Parliamentary Catering Fund.
for purposes of Parliament or a House of Parliament.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Act, where a Fund is established
under this Act or any other law for the purposes of Parliament or a House of
Parliament, the Parliamentary Service Commission shall—
(a) establish procedures and systems for proper and effective management of
the monies and property of the Fund;
(b) establish accounting procedures and systems for the Commission to
properly account for the monies and property;
(c) superintend the expenditure of the monies of the Fund to ensure that the
monies are properly accounted for;
(d) prepare and submit accounts for each financial year in accordance with the
written law for the time being relating to audit for audit by the Auditor-
General; and
(e) ensure that accounts prepared under paragraph (d) comply with the
provisions of this Act.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary may establish a national government public fund with
the approval of the National Assembly.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall designate a person to administer every national
public fund established under subsection (4).
(6) The administrator of a national public fund shall ensure that the earnings
of, or accruals to a national public fund are retained in the fund unless the Cabinet
Secretary directs otherwise.
(7) The administrator of a national public fund shall ensure that money held in
the fund, including any earnings or accruals referred to in subsection (6), is spent
only for the purposes for which the fund is established.
(8) The Cabinet Secretary may wind up a national public fund with the approval
of the National Assembly.
(9) On the winding up of a national public fund—
(a) the administrator of the national public fund shall pay any amount
remaining in the fund into the National Exchequer Account for the credit
of the national government; or

-- 27 of 625 --

28 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the fund from funds of the
national government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval
of the National Assembly; and
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to
Parliament.
(10) The administrator of a national public fund—
(a) shall prepare financial statements for the fund for each financial year in a
form specified by the Accounting Standards Board; and
(b) not later than three months after the end of each financial year, submit
those statements to the Auditor-General and deliver a copy of the
statements to the National Treasury, Commission on Revenue Allocation
and the Controller of Budget.
(11) The regulations shall provide for the establishment, management, operation
or winding-up of national public funds.
(12) This section applies to all other rational public funds including funds
earmarked for specific purposes established by an Act of Parliament but does not
apply to a public fund established by the Constitution.
(13) In this section—
“administrator”, in relation to a national public fund, means a person designated
by the Cabinet Secretary under subsection (5) to administer the fund; and
“national public fund” means a public fund established under subsection (4).
[Act No. 18 of 2018, Sch., Act No. 13 of 2020, s. 2.]
Responsibilities of the National Treasury with respect to the Budget process
National Treasury to prepare annual Budget Policy Statement.
25. (1) The National Treasury shall prepare and submit to Cabinet the Budget
Policy Statement for approval.
(2) The National Treasury shall submit the Budget Policy Statement approved in
terms of subsection (1) to Parliament, by the 15th February in each year.
(3) In preparing the Budget Policy Statement, the National Treasury shall set
out the broad strategic priorities and policy goals that will guide the national
government and county governments in preparing their budgets both for the
following financial year and over the medium term.
(4) The National Treasury shall include in the Budget Policy Statement—
(a) an assessment of the current state of the economy and the financial
outlook over the medium term, including macro-economic forecasts;
(b) the financial outlook with respect to Government revenues, expenditures
and borrowing for the next financial year and over the medium term;
(c) the proposed expenditure limits for the national government, including
those of Parliament and the Judiciary and indicative transfers to county
governments; and

-- 28 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 29
(d) the fiscal responsibility principles and financial objectives over the
medium term including limits on total annual debt.
(5) In preparing the Budget Policy Statement, the National Treasury shall seek
and take into account the views of—
(a) the Commission on Revenue Allocation;
(b) county governments;
(c) Controller of Budget;
(d) the Parliamentary Service Commission;
(e) the Judicial Service Commission;
(f) the public; and
(g) any other interested persons or groups.
(6) Regulations made under this Act shall prescribe circumstances and the
manner in which persons or groups may make written or oral representations about
the contents of the statement.
(7) Parliament shall, not later than fourteen days after the Budget Policy
Statement is submitted to Parliament, table and discuss a report containing its
recommendations and pass a resolution to adopt it with or without amendments.
(8) The Cabinet Secretary shall take into account resolutions passed by
Parliament in finalising the budget for the relevant financial year.
(9) The National Treasury shall publish and publicise the Budget Policy
Statement not later than fifteen days after submission of the Statement to
Parliament.
National Treasury to prepare Budget Review and Outlook Paper.
26. (1) The National Treasury shall prepare and submit to Cabinet for approval,
by the 30th September in each financial year, a Budget Review and Outlook Paper
which shall include—
(a) actual fiscal performance in the previous financial year compared to the
budget appropriation for that year;
(b) updated macro-economic and financial forecasts with sufficient
information to show changes from the forecasts in the most recent Budget
Policy Statement;
(c) information on how actual financial performance for the previous financial
year may have affected compliance with the fiscal responsibility principles
or the financial objectives in the latest Budget Policy Statement; and
(d) the reasons for any deviation from the financial objectives together with
proposals to address the deviation and the time estimated to do so.
(2) Cabinet shall consider the Budget Review and Outlook Paper with a view to
approving it, with or without amendments, not later than fourteen days after its
submission.

-- 29 of 625 --

30 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(3) Not later than seven days after the Budget Review and Outlook Paper has
been approved by Cabinet, the National Treasury shall—
(a) submit the Paper to the Budget Committee of the National Assembly to be
laid before each House of Parliament; and
(b) publish and publicise the Paper not later than fifteen days after laying the
Paper before Parliament.
Publication of pre- and post-election economic and fiscal reports by National
Treasury.
27. (1) The National Treasury shall arrange to be published—
(a) a pre-election economic and fiscal update not earlier than four months
before the polling day for any general election; and
(b) a post-election economic and fiscal update not later than four months after
the polling day of any general election.
(2) The pre-election and post-election economic and fiscal update shall—
(a) detail all election related spending including—
(i) direct election expenses such as those for the Independent Electoral
and Boundaries Commission for costs of elections and election
materials;
(ii) indirect election expenses such as allocations to police and security
forces for the election year; and
(iii) any other expenses related to the election specified in regulations
or instructions; and
(b) be accompanied by a statement signed by the Principal Secretary stating
that the economic and fiscal updates include—
(i) all policy decisions with material economic or fiscal implications
that the national government made before the day on which the
contents of the economic and fiscal updates were finalised;
(ii) all other circumstances with material economic or fiscal
implications of which the National Treasury was aware before those
days; and
(iii) a confirmation that the economic and fiscal updates were prepared
using the best professional judgment and information available
before the economic and fiscal updates were finalised.
(3) If the day of dissolution of Parliament is less than two months before the day
appointed as polling day for the general election, the Cabinet Secretary shall arrange
for the pre-election economic and fiscal update required under this section to be
published not later than fourteen days after the day of the dissolution of Parliament.

-- 30 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 31
Other responsibilities of the National Treasury
Banking arrangements for national government entities.
28. (1) The National Treasury shall authorise the opening, operating and closing
of bank accounts and sub accounts for all national government entities in accordance
with regulations made under this Act.
(2) The National Treasury shall establish a Treasury Single Account into which
all revenues received by national government entities shall be deposited and from
which all payments of money to or on behalf of national government entities shall
be made.
(3) The Treasury Single Account shall not be operated in any manner that
prejudices any entity to which funds have been disbursed.
(4) An accounting officer for a national government entity shall not cause a bank
account of the entity to be overdrawn beyond the limit authorised by the National
Treasury or a board of a national government entity, if any.
(5) Subject to subsection (3), an accounting officer who authorises the bank
account of a national government entity to be overdrawn is liable for the full cost of
the overdrawn amount, in addition to any other disciplinary measures that—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary may impose by regulations; or
(b) any other relevant authority may impose under the provisions of any other
legislation.
(6) The National Treasury shall keep complete and current records of all bank
accounts for which it is responsible under the Constitution, this Act or any other
legislation.
(7) The National Treasury shall give monthly statements on actual revenue
collected in the accounts relating to Article 206 of the Constitution to the
Commission on Revenue Allocation.
Management of cash at the national government level.
29. (1) The National Treasury shall establish a framework within which the
national government shall manage its cash transactions.
(2) Every national government entity, other than a state corporation, shall
submit an annual cash plan and forecast to—
(a) the National Treasury in a form and manner and relating to such periods
directed by that Treasury; and
(b) the Controller of Budget.
(3) Subject to the Constitution, the Cabinet Secretary may, notwithstanding any
previous authority given, limit or suspend national government expenditure, if in
the Cabinet Secretary’s opinion, the exigencies of the financial situation render such
a limitation or suspension necessary.
(4) The approval of the National Assembly for any limitation or suspension under
subsection (3) shall be sought within two months of the decision being made.

-- 31 of 625 --

32 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(5) The National Treasury may invest, subject to any regulations that may be
prescribed, any money kept in a bank account of the national government.
(6) Except as otherwise provided by legislation—
(a) interest received from investments made under subsection (5); and
(b) money received from the redemption or maturity of those investments,
and from the sale or conversion of securities relating to them, is payable
into the National Exchequer Account.
(7) The National Treasury may incur costs, charges and expenses in connection
with negotiating, placing, managing, servicing, or converting any investment
entered into under subsection (5).
(8) Costs, charges or expenses referred to under subsection (7) shall be paid from
the Consolidated Fund in accordance with Article 228 of the Constitution.
Procurement of goods and services.
30. For the purposes of this Act, all procurement of goods and services required
for the purposes of the national government or a national government entity is to
be carried out in accordance with Article 227 of the Constitution and the relevant
legislation on procurement and disposal of assets.
Cabinet Secretary to report on all loans.
31. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit to Parliament, every four months, a
report of all loans made to the national government, national government entities
and county governments, in accordance with Article 211(2) of the Constitution.
(2) Where either House of Parliament is canvassing a matter relating to the public
debt, the Cabinet Secretary shall submit to Parliament, a report of all loans made to
the national government, national government entities, and county governments,
not later than seven days after receiving a request to do so from either House of
Parliament.
(3) At the end of every four months, the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a report
to Parliament stating the loan balances brought forward, carried down, drawings
and amortizations on new loans obtained from outside Kenya or denominated in
foreign currency, and such other information as may be prescribed by regulations,
specifying—
(a) the names of the parties to the loan;
(b) the amount of the loan and the currency in which it is expressed and in
which it is repayable;
(c) the terms and conditions of the loan, including interest and other charges
payable and the terms of repayment;
(d) the amount of the loan advanced at the time the report is submitted;
(e) the purpose for which the loan was used and the perceived benefits of the
loan; and such other information as the Cabinet Secretary may consider
appropriate.
[Act No. 12 of 2023, s. 5.]

-- 32 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 33
Cabinet Secretary to report on national government guarantees.
32. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit to Parliament, a record of all
guarantees given by the national government, not later than seven days after
receiving a request to do so from either House of Parliament.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall, with respect to every such guarantee, specify the
following information in the record—
(a) names of the parties to the loan that is guaranteed;
(b) principal amount of that loan;
(c) terms and conditions applicable to that loan, including—
(i) interest and other charges that are payable in respect of that loan;
and
(ii) terms of its repayment.
(3) Not later than two months after the end of each financial year, the Cabinet
Secretary shall publish and publicise a report giving details of the guarantees given
by the national government during that year.
(3A) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2), the Cabinet Secretary
shall, with respect to credit guarantees extended to private borrowers who are micro,
small or medium enterprises, provide the information specified in section 59A(2)
when either House of Parliament makes a request under subsection (1).
[Act No. 16 of 2020, s. 3.]
Cabinet Secretary to submit national government debt management strategy
to Parliament annually.
33. (1) On or before the 15th February in each year, the Cabinet Secretary shall
submit to Parliament a statement setting out the debt management strategy of the
national government over the medium term with respect to its actual liability and
potential liability in respect of loans and guarantees and its plans for dealing with
those liabilities.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that the medium-term debt management
strategy is aligned to the broad strategic priorities and policy goals set out in the
Budget Policy Statement.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall include in the statement the following
information—
(a) the total stock of debt as at the date of the statement;
(b) the sources of loans made to the national government and the nature of
guarantees given by the national government;
(c) the principal risks associated with those loans and guarantees;
(d) the assumptions underlying the debt management strategy; and
(e) an analysis of the sustainability of the amount of debt, both actual and
potential.

-- 33 of 625 --

34 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(4) Within fourteen days after the debt strategy paper is submitted to
Parliament under this section, the Cabinet Secretary shall submit the statement
to the Commission on Revenue Allocation and the Intergovernmental Budget and
Economic Council and publish and publicise the statement.
The National Treasury to provide Parliament with additional reports when
required.
34. Either House of Parliament may request the Cabinet Secretary or the National
Treasury to prepare and submit to that House a report on any matter relating to the
Cabinet Secretary or National Treasury’s responsibilities as the House of Parliament
may specify.
National government budget process
Stages in the budget process.
35. (1) The budget process for the national government in any financial year
shall comprise the following stages—
(a) integrated development planning process which shall include both long
term and medium term planning;
(b) planning and determining financial and economic policies and priorities
at the national level over the medium term;
(c) preparing overall estimates in the form of the Budget Policy Statement of
national government revenues and expenditures;
(d) adoption of Budget Policy Statement by Parliament as a basis for future
deliberations;
(e) preparing budget estimates for the national government;
(f) submitting those estimates to the National Assembly for approval;
(g) enacting the appropriation Bill and any other Bills required to implement
the National government’s budgetary proposals;
(h) implementing the approved budget;
(i) evaluating and accounting for, the national government’s budgeted
revenues and expenditures; and
(j) reviewing and reporting on those budgeted revenues and expenditures
every three months.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure public participation in the budget process
provided for under subsection (1).
Cabinet Secretary to manage budget process at national level.
36. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall manage the budget process at the national
level.
(2) Not later than the 30th August in each year, the Cabinet Secretary shall issue
to all national government entities a circular setting out guidelines on the budget
process to be followed by them.

-- 34 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 35
(3) The circular shall include—
(a) a schedule for preparation of the budget indicating key dates by which
various exercises are to be completed;
(b) the procedures for the review and projection of revenues and expenditures;
(c) key policy areas and issues that are to be taken into consideration when
preparing the budget;
(d) procedures setting out the manner in which members of the public shall
participate in the budget process;
(e) the format in which budget information and documents shall be
submitted; and
(f) any other information that, in the opinion of the Cabinet Secretary, may
assist the budget process.
(4) Every national government entity shall comply with the guidelines, and in
particular, such dates as are specified in the schedule referred to in subsection (3)(a).
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall by regulations, prescribe procedures specifying
how, when and where members of the public shall participate in the budget process
at the national level.
(6) The Cabinet Secretary shall notify the members of the Intergovernmental
Budget and Economic Council of the commencement of the budget process.
Submission of budget estimates and related documents for approval.
37. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall, within a period allowing time to meet the
deadlines specified in this section, submit to the Cabinet for its approval—
(a) the budget estimates and other documents supporting the budget; and
(b) the draft Bills required to implement the national budget.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit to the National Assembly, by the 30th
April in that year, the following documents—
(a) the budget estimates excluding those for Parliament and the Judiciary;
(b) documents supporting the submitted estimates; and
(c) any other Bills required to implement the national government budget.
(3) The accounting officers for the Parliamentary Services Commission shall, not
later than the 30th April in each financial year—
(a) submit to the National Assembly the budget estimates for Parliament,
including proposed appropriations; and
(b) provide the National Treasury with a copy of those documents.
(4) The Chief Registrar of the Judiciary shall, not later than the 30th April in each
financial year—
(a) submit to the National Assembly the budget estimates for the Judiciary,
including proposed appropriations; and

-- 35 of 625 --

36 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) provide the National Treasury with a copy of those documents.
(5) In preparing the documents referred to in subsections (3) and (4), the
accounting officers for the Parliamentary Service Commission and the Chief
Registrar of the Judiciary—
(a) shall ensure that members of the public are given an opportunity to
participate in the preparation process; and
(b) may make and publish rules to be complied with by those who may wish
to participate in the process.
(6) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit to the National Assembly not later than
the 15th May any comments of the National Treasury on the budgets proposed by
the Parliamentary Service Commission and the Chief Registrar for the Judiciary.
(7) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that the budget process is conducted in a
manner and within a time frame sufficient to permit the various participants in the
process to comply with the requirements of the Constitution and this Act.
(8) As soon as practicable after the budget estimates and other documents have
been submitted to the National Assembly under this section, the Cabinet Secretary
shall publicise those documents.
(9) Upon approval of the budget estimates by the National Assembly, the Cabinet
Secretary shall prepare and submit an Appropriation Bill of the approved estimates
to the National Assembly.
[Act No. 38 of 2016, s. 57.]
Submission of other budget documents to the National Assembly.
38. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit to the National Assembly the
following other budget documents for each financial year—
(a) a budget summary that includes—
(i) a summary of budget policies including policies on revenue,
expenditure, debt and deficit financing;
(ii) an explanation of how the budget relates to the fiscal responsibility
principles and to the financial objectives; and
(iii) a memorandum by the Cabinet Secretary explaining how the
resolutions adopted by the National Assembly on the Budget Policy
Statement under section 25(7) have been taken into account.
(b) the format of the budget estimates shall include—
(i) a list of all entities that are to receive funds appropriated from the
budget of the national government;
(ii) estimates of revenue allocated to, and expenditures projected from,
the Equalisation Fund over the medium term, with an explanation
of the reasons for those revenue allocations and expenditures and
how these estimates comply with the policy developed by the

-- 36 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 37
Commission on Revenue Allocation under Article 216(4) of the
Constitution;
(iii) all revenue allocations to county governments from the national
government’s share in terms of Article 202(2) of the Constitution,
including conditional and unconditional grants;
(iv) all estimated revenue by broad economic classification;
(v) all estimated expenditure, by vote and by programme, clearly
identifying both recurrent and development expenditures; and
(vi) an estimate of any budget deficit or surplus for the financial year and
medium term and the proposed sources of financing;
(c) information regarding loans made by the national government, including
an estimate of principal, interest and other charges to be received by the
national government in the financial year in respect of those loans;
(d) information regarding loans and guarantees made to and by the national
government, including an estimate of principal, interest and other charges
to be paid by the national government in the financial year in respect of
those loans;
(e) information regarding any payments to be made and liabilities to be
incurred by the national government for which an appropriation Act is
not required which shall include the constitutional or national legislative
authority for any such payments or liabilities; and
(f) a statement by the National Treasury specifying the measures taken by
the national government to implement any recommendations made by the
National Assembly with respect to the budget for the previous financial
year or years.
(2) The nature of information that is to be presented in the budget estimates and
the form of its presentation shall be prescribed in regulations and the regulations
shall be tabled in Parliament for approval.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that the expenditure appropriations and
the budget estimates in an appropriation Bill are presented in a way that—
(a) is accurate, precise, informative and pertinent to budget issues; and
(b) clearly identifies the appropriations by vote and programme.
National Assembly to consider budget estimates.
39. (1) The National Assembly shall consider the budget estimates of the
national government, including those of Parliament and the Judiciary, with a view
to approving them, with or without amendments, in time for the Appropriation Bill
and any other relevant Bills, required to implement the budget to be assented to by
the 30th June each year.
(2) Before the National Assembly considers the estimates of revenue and
expenditure, the relevant committee of the National Assembly shall discuss and
review the estimates and make recommendations to the National Assembly, taking
into account the views of the Cabinet Secretary and the public on the proposed
recommendations.

-- 37 of 625 --

38 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(3) The National Assembly may amend the budget estimates of the national
government only in accordance with the Division of Revenue Act and the resolutions
adopted with regard to the Budget Policy Statement ensuring that—
(a) an increase in expenditure in a proposed appropriation is balanced by a
reduction in expenditure in another proposed appropriation; or
(b) a proposed reduction in expenditure is used to reduce the deficit.
(4) Where a Bill originating from a member of the National Assembly proposes
amendments after passing the budget estimates and the appropriations Bill by
Parliament, the National Assembly may only proceed in accordance with—
(a) the Division of Revenue Act;
(b) Article 114 of the Constitution; and
(c) any increase in expenditure in a proposed appropriation is balanced by
a reduction in expenditure in another proposed appropriation or any
proposed reduction in expenditure is used to reduce the deficit.
(5) Not later than twenty-one days after the National Assembly has approved the
budget estimates, the National Treasury shall consolidate, publish and publicise the
budget estimates.
(6) The National Treasury shall take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure
that the approved budget estimates are prepared and publicised in a form that is
clear and easily understood by, and readily accessible to, members of the public.
(7) Following approval of the budget estimates under this section, and before the
Appropriation Act is assented to, the National Assembly may authorise withdrawals
in accordance with Article 222 of the Constitution, and such authority shall be
communicated to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for finance by the Speaker of the
National Assembly within seven days of that authority being granted by the National
Assembly.
(8) The Controller of Budget shall ensure that members of the public are given
information on budget implementation both at the national and county government
level in accordance with Article 228 of the Constitution.
[Act No. 12 of 2019, Sch.]
Submission, consideration and passing of Finance Bill.
39A. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit to the National Assembly, on or
before 30th April, the Finance Bill setting out the revenue raising measures for the
National Government.
(2) Following submission of the Finance Bill by the Cabinet Secretary, the
relevant committee of the National Assembly shall introduce the Bill in the National
Assembly.
(3) The National Assembly shall consider and pass the Finance Bill, with or
without amendments, in time for it to be presented for assent by 30th June each year.

-- 38 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 39
(4) Any recommendations made by the relevant committee of the National
Assembly or resolution passed by the National Assembly on revenue matters shall—
(a) ensure that the total amount of revenue raised is consistent with the
approved fiscal framework;
(b) take into account the principles of equity, certainty and ease of collection;
(c) consider the impact of the proposed changes on the composition of the tax
revenue with reference to direct and indirect taxes;
(d) consider domestic, regional and international tax trends;
(e) consider the impact on development, investment, employment and
economic growth;
(f) take into account the recommendations of the Cabinet Secretary as
provided under Article 114 of the Constitution; and
(g) take into account the taxation and other tariff arrangements and
obligations that Kenya has ratified, including taxation and tariff
arrangements under the East African Community Treaty.
[Act No. 12 of 2019, Sch., Act No. 1 of 2020, s. 27.]
Submission and consideration of budget policy highlights and the Finance Bill
in the National Assembly.
40. (1) Each financial year, the Cabinet Secretary shall, with the approval of
Cabinet, make a public pronouncement of the budget policy highlights and revenue
raising measures for the national government.
(2) In making the pronouncement under subsection (1), the Cabinet Secretary
shall take into account any regional or international agreements that Kenya has
ratified, including the East African Community Treaty and where such agreements
prescribe the date when the budget policy highlights and revenue raising measures
are to be pronounced, the Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that the measures are
pronounced on the appointed date.
(3) Deleted by Act No. 3 of 2024, Sch.
(4) Deleted by Act No. 3 of 2024, Sch.
(5) Any of the recommendations made by the relevant committee of the National
Assembly or adopted by the National Assembly on revenue matters shall—
(a) ensure that the total amount of revenue raised is consistent with the
approved fiscal framework and the Division of Revenue Act;
(b) take into account the principles of equity, certainty and ease of collection;
(c) consider the impact of the proposed changes on the composition of the tax
revenue with reference to the direct and indirect taxes;
(d) consider domestic, regional and international tax trends;
(e) consider the impact on development, investment, employment and
economic growth;

-- 39 of 625 --

40 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(f) take into account the recommendations of the Cabinet Secretary as
provided under Article 114 of the Constitution; and
(g) take into account the taxation and other tariff agreements and obligations
that Kenya has ratified, including taxation and tariff agreements under the
East African Community Treaty.
(6) The recommendations of the Cabinet Secretary in subsection (5)(f) shall be
included in the report and tabled in the National Assembly.
[Act No. 6 of 2014, s. 4, Act No. 3 of 2024, Sch.]
41. Deleted by Act No. 12 of 2019, Sch.
Consideration by Parliament of Bills allocating revenue and additional
allocations.
42. Parliament shall consider the Division of Revenue Bill, the County Allocation
of Revenue Bill, and a County Governments Additional Allocations Bill not later than
thirty days after the Bills have been introduced with a view to approving them, with
or without amendments.
[Act No. 17 of 2022, s. 9(a).]
Limited powers of accounting officer of national government entity to
reallocate appropriate funds.
43. (1) An accounting officer may reallocate funds from the authorised use but
may not reallocate funds where—
(a) the funds are appropriated for transfer to another government entity or
person;
(b) the funds are appropriated for capital expenditure except to defray other
capital expenditure;
(c) the reallocation of funds is from wages to non-wages expenditure; or
(d) the transfer of funds may result in contravention of fiscal responsibility
principles.
(2) An accounting officer for a national government entity, other than a state
corporation, may reallocate funds between programs, or between Sub-Votes, in the
budget for a financial year if—
(a) there are provisions in the budget of a program or Sub-Vote which are
unlikely to be utilised;
(b) a request for the reallocation has been made to the National Treasury
explaining the reasons for the reallocation and the National Treasury has
approved the request; and
(c) the total sum of all reallocations made to or from a program or Sub-Vote
does not exceed ten percent of the total expenditure approved for that
program or Sub-Vote for that financial year.
(3) Regulations made under this Act may provide for the reallocation of funds
within Sub-votes or programs.

-- 40 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 41
National government to submit supplementary budget to Parliament.
44. (1) The national government shall submit to Parliament for approval,
a supplementary budget in support of money spent under Article 223 of the
Constitution.
(2) After Parliament has approved spending under subsection (1), an
Appropriation Bill shall be introduced for the appropriation of the money spent.
(3) The supplementary budget shall include a statement showing how the
additional expenditure relates to the fiscal responsibility principles and financial
objectives.
Appropriations to lapse if unspent at the end of the financial year.
45. (1) An appropriation that has not been spent at the end of the financial year
for which it was appropriated shall lapse immediately at the end of that financial
year.
(2) Subject to any other legislation, where, at the end of a financial year, a
national government entity is holding appropriated money that was withdrawn
from the National Exchequer Account but has not been spent, it shall repay the
unspent money into the National Exchequer Account and shall prepare and submit
a statement of the same to the Controller of Budget.
Responsibilities of the Cabinet Secretary and functions
of the national government with respect to grants and loans
Overall responsibility of Cabinet Secretary.
46. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall, in addition to his or her other functions
under the Constitution, this Act and any other legislation—
(a) oversee the formulation of macro-economic and financial policies of the
Government;
(b) by agreement, assist national government entities and county
governments in building capacity for efficient, effective and transparent
financial management;
(c) where applicable, support the efforts of national government entities and
county governments to avert or resolve their financial problems.
(2) Within twenty-one days after the end of each month, the Cabinet Secretary
shall publish in the Gazette a statement of actual revenues collected by category and
net exchequer issues by the National Treasury.
(3) In the performance of the duties and functions under this Act the Cabinet
Secretary shall—
(a) seek views from county governments on the proposed macro-economic
and financial policies using the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic
Council established under this Act;
(b) share with national government entities and county governments any
findings that may assist national government entities and county
governments in improving their financial management; and

-- 41 of 625 --

42 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(c) upon detecting any emerging or impending financial problems in a
national government entity or county government, immediately alert the
national government entity or county government of the problem.
Conditions for receiving grants and donations by national government or its
entities or third parties.
47. (1) In this section and section 48—
(a) “donation” means a gift or a contribution;
(b) “grant” means financial or other assistance by a development partner
which is not repayable and—
(i) under which public money is paid to or used by a grant recipient;
(ii) which is intended to finance or facilitate the development of
projects or delivery of services or otherwise assist the grant recipient
to achieve goals that are consistent with the policy objectives of the
national government; and
(iii) under which the grant recipient is required to act in accordance with
any terms or conditions specified in a grant agreement.
(c) “grant recipient” means the national government or a national
government entity authorised to control or spend money under this Act
or an incorporated or unincorporated body not otherwise authorised to
control or spend money under this Act;
(d) “intended beneficiaries” means the people of Kenya whom the projects or
public services financed by a grant are intended to benefit;
(e) “third party” means any other person other than a public officer.
(2) Subsections (3) to (10) apply to the national government and a national
government entity.
(3) The national government or a national government entity may receive a grant
or donation from a development partner with the approval of the Cabinet Secretary
and only as provided by this section.
(4) Funds received in the form of grants or donations shall only be spent in
accordance with Articles 221 and 223 of the Constitution and this section.
(5) As soon as possible after receiving the grant or donation, the recipient shall
notify the Cabinet Secretary of the receipt.
(6) If a project that is being financed by a grant or donation requires national
government funding, the project may only be started when—
(a) the required funding has been appropriated in accordance with this Act or
is authorised by other legislation; or
(b) the Cabinet Secretary has given a written authorisation for the project to
start.
(7) The Cabinet Secretary shall inform Parliament of the authorisation given
under subsection (6)(b) in accordance with Article 223 of the Constitution.

-- 42 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 43
(8) The recipient of a grant or donation from a development partner shall record
the amount or value of the grant or donation in its books of accounts.
(9) Subject to audit in terms of Article 229(4) of the Constitution, the recipient of
a grant or donation shall administer and account for the grant or donation by using—
(a) government financial accounting and auditing laws and, administrative
procedures; or
(b) any financial accounting rules and procedures for money specified in the
agreement between the recipient and the development partner.
(10) The Cabinet Secretary may in addition to the audit under subsection (9),
permit a donor of a grant to audit such funds on the basis of its own financial
accounting rules.
Regulations on grant administration.
48. (1) Regulations approved by Parliament shall provide for the administration,
control and management of grants, including—
(a) procedures to ensure that grants are spent on the basis of the integrated
national development plan;
(b) procedures for the allocation and disbursement of the grants;
(c) requiring that grants be used only to finance programmes within the
integrated development plan;
(d) the publication of transparent criteria for the allocation of grants;
(e) requiring specific terms and conditions in agreements to which grant
recipients are subjected;
(f) procedures for the budgeting, financial management, accounting and
reporting of grants by grants recipients;
(g) procedures under which a third party may be authorised to receive, control
or pay public money as a grant; and
(h) measures to ensure that a third party authorised to receive, control or
pay public money as a grant, or responsible for any other aspect of
administration of a grant, is subject to the same obligations as a public
officer under this Act.
(2) Regulations under subsection (1) shall include measures to ensure public
disclosure, accountability and participation in relation to the grants, including—
(a) timely public disclosure to intended beneficiaries of the allocation and
disbursement of grants to grant recipients;
(b) timely public disclosure by grant recipients to intended beneficiaries of
expenditure and performance achieved in relation to the grant;
(c) measures to facilitate intended beneficiaries to participate in the design
and management of projects or public services financed by the grant;
(d) measures allowing intended beneficiaries to report instances of non-
compliance with the regulations or grant agreement;

-- 43 of 625 --

44 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(e) sanctions to be imposed on grant recipients for non-compliance with grant
conditions by any grant recipient; and
(f) obligations of a public officer or third party authorised to receive, control
or pay public money as grants.
(3) A third party shall not receive, have custody of, or pay public money otherwise
than in accordance with an authorisation given in accordance with regulations made
under subsection (1).
(4) A third party who contravenes provision under subsection (3), commits an
offence and is liable on conviction to a term of imprisonment not exceeding two
years or to a fine not exceeding one million shillings, or to both and shall make good
the loss arising from the use of public funds contrary to law.
Authority for borrowing by the national government.
49. (1) Subject to provisions of this Act, the Cabinet Secretary may, on behalf of
the national government, raise a loan only if the loan and the terms and conditions
for the loan are set out in writing and in accordance with—
(a) the fiscal responsibility principles and the financial objectives set out in
the most recent Budget Policy Statement; and
(b) the debt management strategy of the national government over the
medium term.
(2) A loan may be raised either within Kenya or from outside Kenya.
Obligations and restrictions on national government guaranteeing and
borrowing.
50. (1) In guaranteeing and borrowing money, the national government shall
ensure that its financing needs and payment obligations are met at the lowest
possible cost in the market which is consistent with a prudent degree of risk, while
ensuring that the overall level of public debt is sustainable.
(2) The national government may borrow money in accordance with this Act or
any other legislation, subject to the threshold specified in subsection (2A) of this
section.
(2A) The borrowing by the national government referred to in subsection (2) shall
not exceed fifty-five percent of the gross domestic product in present value terms.
(2B) Notwithstanding subsection (2A), the national government may, in
exceptional circumstances, exceed the threshold set under that subsection by not
more than five percent.
(2C) The Cabinet Secretary shall, not later than five years from the date of
the coming into force of subsections (2A) and (2B), take measures to ensure that
borrowing by the national government complies with the threshold prescribed in
subsection (2A).
(2D) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit to Parliament, a report on the breach
of the debt threshold, indicating the exceptional circumstances, if any, provided for
in subsection (2B).

-- 44 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 45
(3) The national government may borrow money only for the budget as approved
by Parliament and the allocations for loans approved by Parliament.
(4) The guarantee of debt shall be done in terms of criteria agreed with the
Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council and prescribed in regulations
approved by Parliament.
(5) Parliament shall provide for thresholds for the borrowing entitlements of the
national government and county governments and their entities.
(6) A public debt and resultant financial obligations incurred by the national
government is a charge on the Consolidated Fund, unless the Cabinet Secretary
determines, by Regulations approved by Parliament, that all or part of the
public debt and resultant financial obligation is a charge on another public fund
established by the national government or any of its entities.
(7) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that the proceeds of any loan raised under
this Act are—
(a) paid into the Consolidated Fund;
(b) paid into any other public fund established by the national government or
any of its entities as the Cabinet Secretary may determine in accordance
with regulations approved by Parliament;
(c) disbursed directly to the suppliers where the loan is a government to
government loan and is raised for the purpose of financing goods and
services provided by a supplier outside Kenya; or
(d) in the case of an external loan or external government security, applied,
in part, to pay at closing, pre-negotiated expenses associated solely
and exhaustively with the borrowing, including but not limited to, the
fees, commissions and expenses of lenders, financial arrangers, managers
and book runners, fiscal agents, trustees, paying agents, exchange and
information agents, syndicate agents, counsel, clearing systems, listing
agents, and stock exchanges, rating agencies and other expenses of a
similar nature arising from the external loan or external government
security.
(8) The Cabinet Secretary may, by regulations approved by Parliament, establish
such sinking fund or funds for the redemption of loans raised under this Act by the
national government.
(9) The Cabinet Secretary may, subject to Article 227 of the Constitution and in
accordance with national legislation on Public Procurement and Asset Disposal—
(a) appoint advisers, agents and underwriters for the purpose of raising loans
and issuing, managing or redeeming national government securities; and
(b) enter into agreements with the advisers, agents and underwriters
appointed under paragraph (a) on the role to be undertaken by them and
the remuneration to be paid to them.

-- 45 of 625 --

46 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(10) Any expenses incurred in connection with borrowing by the national
government or the issue of national government securities is a charge—
(a) on the Consolidated Fund; or
(b) on such other public fund established by the national government or
any of its entities as the Cabinet Secretary may determine by regulations
approved by Parliament.
(11) The costs, interests and principal payments made by the national
government concerning loans to each level of government shall be passed on by the
national government to the relevant level of government.
(12) A copy of the details of the expenses and costs referred to under subsections
(10) and (11) shall be submitted to the Controller of Budget and to Parliament, at
the end of each quarter.
[Act No. 6 of 2014, s. 5, Act No. 12 of 2023, s. 6.]
Borrowing by national government entities.
51. (1) A national government entity may borrow in accordance with this Act or
any other Act of Parliament.
(2) A national government entity shall obtain the approval of the Cabinet
Secretary for its intended program of borrowing, refinancing and repayment of
loans—
(a) over the medium term; and
(b) for the forthcoming financial year, prior to the beginning of that financial
year.
(3) A national government entity shall also obtain the approval of the Cabinet
Secretary before making any changes to its program of borrowing, refinancing and
repayment during a financial year.
(4) The national government is not liable to contribute towards payment of any
debt or liability of a national government entity, unless the national government has
guaranteed the debt or liability.
Persons authorized to execute loan documents at national government.
52. (1) The Cabinet Secretary or any person designated by the Cabinet Secretary
in writing is authorised to execute loan documents for borrowing by the national
government.
(2) Despite the provisions of subsection (1), the following persons are authorised
to execute loan documents for borrowing by a National government entity—
(a) the accounting officer responsible for the entity; or
(b) any other specified officer authorised by legislation to execute such
documents on behalf of the entity.

-- 46 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 47
Issuance of securities by national government.
53. (1) The national government may issue national government securities,
whether for money that it has borrowed or for any other purpose, only in
circumstances expressly authorised by this Act.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary may issue national government securities on behalf
of the national government for money borrowed by the national government in
accordance with criteria prescribed by regulations approved by Parliament for the
purpose of this subsection.
(3) Any national government securities issued by the Cabinet Secretary under
this section shall be within the borrowing limits set out by the National Assembly
under section 50(2).
(4) The authority of the Cabinet Secretary to borrow money includes the
authority to borrow money by issuing national government securities.
(5) National government securities may be issued in one or more series and in
accordance with prescribed regulations.
(6) An agreement to obtain a loan by the national government or a national
government entity may be amended from time to time and where the amendment
results in further indebtedness or prejudice to the entity that borrowed, the
amendment shall be approved by Parliament.
(7) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that every national government security
issued under this section is given in the name of the Republic of Kenya.
(8) A national government security may be executed on behalf of the national
government only by—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary;
(b) a delegate appointed by the Cabinet Secretary; or
(c) a borrowing agent appointed for the purposes of this Act.
(9) For the purposes of subsection (8), it shall be sufficient if the signature of a
person who is required to execute a national government security under this section
is reproduced on the security.
(10) The Cabinet Secretary may authorise in writing the issue of a duplicate
national government security to replace a national government security that is lost,
damaged, or destroyed, but only if the Cabinet Secretary is satisfied that the loss,
damage or destruction has occurred.
(11) Subject to any other legislation, secondary trading of national government
securities shall be carried out only in such manner as may be prescribed by
regulations made for that purpose and for purposes of this subsection “secondary
trading” means any activity leading to a change in the ownership of a national
government security before its redemption date.
(12) Nothing provided in this section shall prevent, government securities to be
issued and exist in electronic form as a debt entry.

-- 47 of 625 --

48 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(13) If the proceeds of a national government security have not been collected by,
or cannot be paid to, the holder of the security because the whereabouts of the holder
or, if the holder has died, the whereabouts of the holder’s personal representatives,
are unknown, the Cabinet Secretary shall arrange for the National Treasury to credit
the amount of money due to the holder to an interest free account for the holder’s
benefit.
(14) If, after six years from the redemption date of a national government
security, the proceeds of the security have not been collected by, or paid to, the
holder or the holder’s personal representatives, the Cabinet Secretary shall return
the uncollected amount to the National Exchequer Account to form part of the
Consolidated Fund in accordance with regulations.
(15) The right of any person who has a legitimate claim to the proceeds of a
security is not affected by the payment of the proceeds into the Consolidated Fund.
(16) The Cabinet Secretary shall publish and publicise annually all payments
made in terms of subsection (13).
[Act No. 6 of 2014, s. 6.]
Issuance of external securities by national government.
53A. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 53 of this Act, the national
government may issue external government securities, for money borrowed or for
any other purpose, only in circumstances expressly authorised by this Act.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary may raise an external loan or issue external
government securities, authorized by this Act, on behalf of the national government
for money borrowed by the national government in such manner as the Cabinet
Secretary may determine.
(3) Any external loans or external government securities issued by the Cabinet
Secretary under this section shall be within the borrowing limits set by Parliament
under section 50(2) of this Act.
(4) The authority of the Cabinet Secretary to borrow money includes the
authority to borrow money by raising external loans or issuing external government
securities.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that every external loan or external
government security issued under this section is given in the name of the Republic
of Kenya.
(6) An external loan or external government security may be executed on behalf
of the national government only by—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary;
(b) a delegate appointed by the Cabinet Secretary, in writing; or
(c) a borrowing agent appointed in accordance with section 50(9) of this Act.
(7) For the purposes of subsection (6), it shall be sufficient if the signature of a
person who is required to execute an external government security under this section
is reproduced on the security.

-- 48 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 49
(8) External government securities shall be registered and may be recorded and
traded in accordance with the terms and conditions of the external government
security.
(9) Claims against the borrower or issuer by holders of external loans or external
government securities for payment shall be prescribed and become void if the claims
are not made within six (6) years from the redemption date in the case of principal
and five years from the due date in the case of interest or any other amount.
(10) In the case of external government securities, a duplicate external
government security may be issued in accordance with the terms and conditions
applicable to the external government security to replace an external government
security that is lost, damaged or destroyed.
[Act No. 6 of 2014, s. 7.]
Exemption from stamp duty.
54. Duty is not chargeable under the Stamp Duty Act (Cap. 480) for the issue of
a national government security.
Establishment of the office of Registrar of national government securities.
55. (1) There is established an office of the Registrar of the National Government
Securities which shall be an office under the Public Debt Management Office.
(2) The office of Registrar of the National Government Securities shall be headed
by the Registrar who shall be competitively recruited and appointed by the Cabinet
Secretary.
(3) The Registrar shall establish and maintain a register, to be known as the
Register of the National Government Securities in which shall be recorded details of
all securities issued by or on behalf of the national government.
(4) Securities issued by or on behalf of the national government shall be
published and publicised.
(5) An entry in the Register relating to a national government security is evidence
of the ownership of the security, unless the contrary is proved.
(6) The holder of a national government security recorded in the Register may,
in writing, request the Registrar to amend the entry relating to the security.
(7) If a request under subsection (6) is in accordance with guidelines given by
the Cabinet Secretary for the purposes of this subsection, the Registrar shall, in
accordance with the request, amend the entry in the Register relating to the security.
(8) The Registrar shall provide the holder of a national government security with
a consolidated statement in writing, showing all entries in the register relating to
the security—
(a) as soon as practicable after the security is issued;
(b) at least once during each year the security is held; and
(c) immediately after the security is redeemed.

-- 49 of 625 --

50 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(9) On receiving a written request from the holder of a national government
security, the Registrar shall provide the holder with a statement showing all entries
in the Register relating to the security.
(10) The provisions of this section shall not apply to external government
securities except that notifications shall be made in the Register of the National
Government Securities to reflect the outstanding amount of each issue of external
debt securities.
[Act No. 6 of 2014, s. 8.]
Power of national government to enter into derivative transactions.
56. (1) The national government may enter into derivative transactions, either
directly or indirectly through an intermediary, but only within the framework and
limits of the Budget Policy Statement and in a manner prescribed by regulations.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary may, on behalf of the national government, in
exceptional circumstances enter into a derivative transaction if it appears to that
Cabinet Secretary to be in the public interest to do so and the transaction does
not result in commitment that is beyond what is contained in the Budget Policy
Statement.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary may enter into a derivative transaction on such terms
and conditions, within the scope prescribed by the regulations approved by the
National Assembly.
(4) Money required to be paid by the national government under a derivative
transaction entered into under this section shall be a charge—
(a) on the Consolidated Fund; or
(b) on some other public fund established for the purpose of making such
payments, if the Cabinet Secretary determines so.
(5) Any expense incurred in connection with a derivative transaction entered into
by the national government or by the Cabinet Secretary on behalf of the national
government shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund and no further appropriation
than this section shall be required.
(6) Derivative transactions entered into in terms of this section shall be
published and publicised.
Power of national government to lend money.
57. (1) The national government is authorised to lend money but only in
accordance with terms and conditions prescribed by the regulations approved by
Parliament.
(2) A national government entity may lend money only if authorised to do so
by an Act of Parliament and in accordance with terms and conditions prescribed in
regulations.

-- 50 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 51
(3) The Cabinet Secretary may, in relation to any money sent by the national
government under this section—
(a) accept money payable under the loan in any currency considered
appropriate by the Cabinet Secretary in consultation with the Central Bank
of Kenya; and
(b) agree at any time to revise upwards any security given in respect of that
loan.
(4) Money loaned under this section is payable only—
(a) from an appropriation for development expenditure; or
(b) from some other authority approved by Parliament for the purpose for
which the loan is made.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that a security given in respect of a loan
under this section is given in the name of the national government.
(6) The Cabinet Secretary may, on behalf of the national government, carry out
any of the responsibilities and exercise any of the powers of the national government
with respect to securing a loan granted by the national government.
Power of Cabinet Secretary to guarantee loans.
58. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the Cabinet Secretary may guarantee a loan of
a county government or any other borrower on behalf of the national government
and that loan shall be approved by Parliament.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall not guarantee a loan under subsection (1)
unless—
(a) the loan is for a capital project;
(b) the borrower is capable of repaying the loan, and paying any interest or
other amount payable in respect of it;
(c) in the case of a private borrower, there is sufficient security for the loan;
(d) the financial position of the borrower over the medium term is likely to be
satisfactory;
(e) the terms of the guarantee comply with the fiscal responsibility principles
and financial objectives of the national government;
(f) where Parliament has passed a resolution setting a limit for the purposes
of this section—
(i) the amount guaranteed does not exceed that limit; or
(ii) if it exceeds that limit, the draft guarantee document has been
approved by resolution of both Houses of Parliament;
(g) the Cabinet Secretary takes into account the equity between the national
government’s interests and the county government’s interests so as to
ensure fairness;
(h) the borrower complies with any conditions imposed by the Cabinet
Secretary in accordance with the regulations;

-- 51 of 625 --

52 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(i) the Cabinet Secretary has taken into account the recommendation of
the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council in respect of any
guarantee to a county government; and
(j) the loan is made in accordance with provisions of this Act and any
regulations made thereunder.
(3) Parliament may approve a draft loan guarantee document as provided by
subsection (2)(f)(ii) only if satisfied that—
(a) the guarantee is in the public interest;
(b) the borrower’s financial position is strong enough to enable the borrower
to repay the loan proposed to be guaranteed and to pay interest or other
amounts payable in respect of the loan; and
(c) the loan is geared towards stimulating economic growth in a county
government.
(4) To enable Parliament to decide whether or not to approve a draft loan
guarantee document as provided by subsection (3), the Cabinet Secretary shall
prepare and submit to each of the House of Parliament a paper that—
(a) gives details of the loan that is proposed to be guaranteed, including the
amount of the loan, the terms of repayment, and the details of the interest
or any other amount payable under the loan;
(b) specifies the national government’s total contingent liability under
guarantees given under this section; and
(c) specifies any other information that the Cabinet Secretary considers
relevant.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) (c), the Cabinet Secretary
may guarantee credit which is extended to a private borrower, for enterprise
development or such other purpose as the Cabinet Secretary may prescribe, where
the borrower does not have sufficient security.
(6) The Cabinet Secretary may only guarantee credit which is extended to a
borrower under subsection (5), if the borrower—
(a) is a micro, small or medium enterprise;
(b) is registered as a business or company under the relevant laws;
(c) is a registered taxpayer and is in compliance with the relevant tax laws;
(d) is registered by a county government and holds a valid business permit or
trade licence;
(e) is not part of any group or related to any enterprise which would otherwise
not be eligible for credit guarantee under this section; and
(f) agrees in writing to comply with the provisions of this Act and any
conditions that may be imposed by the Cabinet Secretary.
(7) A guarantee for credit extended to a micro, small or medium enterprise under
subsection (5) shall be for a portion of the credit.

-- 52 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 53
(8) A guarantee for credit extended to a micro, small or medium enterprises
shall be given under a scheme established by the Cabinet Secretary for the partial
mitigation of default risks for credit extended to micro, small or medium enterprises.
(9) The Cabinet Secretary shall prescribe regulations for the operation of the
scheme under subsection (8) which shall, provide for the following—
(a) the institutions that shall be eligible to extend credit to micro, small or
medium enterprises for which guarantees may be given under subsection
(5);
(b) enterprises that shall be eligible to be given a guarantee under subsection
(5);
(c) the conditions for a grant of guarantee for credit extended to a micro, small
or medium enterprise under subsection (5);
(d) the proportion of security for the credit that a micro, small or medium
enterprise shall provide before being granted a guarantee under subsection
(5);
(e) the types of credit extended to micro, small or medium enterprises that
shall be eligible for guarantees under subsection (5);
(f) the periods for which guarantees for credit to micro, small and medium
enterprises shall be applicable;
(g) the circumstances under which a credit guarantee shall be liquidated
or varied if a borrower defaults on credit that was guaranteed under
subsection (5);
(h) the maximum percentage of the Scheme funds which may be used to
guarantee any individual borrower;
(i) mechanisms to ease access to credit guarantees by enterprises owned by
women, youth and persons with disabilities;
(j) mechanisms for recovering the money from the borrower where the credit
guarantee is liquidated;
(k) a limit on the period of default to a maximum of six months; and
(l) any other relevant matter.
[Act No. 16 of 2020, s. 4.]
Cabinet Secretary to submit a statement on loan guarantee to Parliament.
59. Not later than fourteen days after the guarantee is entered into, the Cabinet
Secretary shall submit to Parliament and publish a statement—
(a) stating that a guarantee is entered into; and

-- 53 of 625 --

54 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) containing details of—
(i) the guarantee, including the name and other particulars of the
borrower whose loan is guaranteed;
(ii) the duration and nature of the guarantee;
(iii) a risk assessment in respect of the guarantee; and
(iv) any other information prescribed by regulations for the purposes of
this subsection.
Cabinet Secretary to submit a report on credit guarantees to micro, small and
medium enterprises to Parliament.
59A. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall prepare a statement of the credit guarantees
granted under section 58(5) and a summary thereon in such detail as the Cabinet
Secretary may determine.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall, at least once in every year, submit to Parliament
the summary prepared under subsection (1) together with a report of—
(a) the total value of credit guarantees given during that period;
(b) the total value of credit guarantees liquidated during that period;
(c) the total value of outstanding credit guarantees on the date of the report;
(d) the risk assessment of the credit guarantees or classes of guarantees;
(e) information on the total value of credit guarantees, disaggregated into
the number of enterprises owned by women, youth and persons with
disabilities which have been guaranteed;
(f) information on the total value of credit guarantees, disaggregated into the
number of micro, small and medium enterprises guaranteed and by the
respective regions; and
(g) any other relevant information prescribed by regulations for the purposes
of this section.
[Act No. 16 of 2020, s. 5.]
Money payable in respect of a guarantee to be a charge on the Consolidated
Fund.
60. (1) Subject to subsection (2), money payable on a guarantee is a charge on,
and is payable out of, the Consolidated Fund without further appropriation than this
section.
(2) Money payable on a guarantee shall be paid only if the payment has been
authorised by the Controller of Budget.
(3) Where money is paid out of the Consolidated Fund on a guarantee, the
Cabinet Secretary shall submit a report to Parliament giving details of the payment.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall include in the report made under subsection (3)—
(a) details of the guarantee;
(b) the circumstances giving rise to the payment;

-- 54 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 55
(c) reasons why the borrower failed to pay; and
(d) such further information as the Cabinet Secretary may consider relevant.
Recovery of amounts paid on a guarantee.
61. (1) Money paid by the Cabinet Secretary’ on a guarantee, including any
expenses incurred by the Cabinet Secretary in respect of the guarantee, shall—
(a) be a debt due to the national government from the borrower whose loan
was guaranteed; and
(b) be recoverable from the borrower as a debt due to the national government
by—
(i) proceedings brought in a court of competent jurisdiction; or
(ii) withholding a transfer of money in terms of Article 225 of the
Constitution, if the borrower receives appropriations.
(2) Where Cabinet considers that the debt is more likely to be recovered if the
borrower is allowed to pay the debt over a period of time, the Cabinet Secretary may
enter into an agreement with the borrower to pay the debt over that period and at
such intervals, and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be specified in the
agreement.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall not impose terms and conditions in an agreement
under subsection (2) which are inconsistent with the terms and conditions specified
in the guarantee document.
(4) Where the Cabinet Secretary enters into an agreement under subsection (2),
no proceedings under subsection (1)(b) shall be taken unless the borrower defaults
under the agreement.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that any money received or recovered
from a borrower in respect of money paid under a guarantee entered into under this
section is paid into the Consolidated Fund.
The Public Debt Management Office
Establishment and objectives of the Public Debt Management Office.
62. (1) There is established an office to be known as the Public Debt Management
Office within the National Treasury.
(2) The Head of the Public Debt Management Office shall be recruited through a
competitive process by the Public Service Commission.
(3) The objectives of the Public Debt Management Office shall be to—
(a) minimise the cost of public debt management and borrowing over the
long-term taking account of risk;
(b) promote the development of the market institutions for Government debt
securities; and
(c) ensure the sharing of the benefits and costs of public debt between the
current and future generations.

-- 55 of 625 --

56 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Functions of the Public Debt Management Office.
63. The functions of the Public Debt Management Office shall include—
(a) carrying out the government’s debt management policy of minimising its
financing cost over the long-term taking account of risk;
(b) maintaining a reliable debt data base for all loans taken by the national
government, county governments and their entities including other loans
guaranteed by the national government;
(c) prepare and update the annual medium-term debt management strategy
including debt sustainability analysis;
(d) prepare and implement the national government borrowing plan including
servicing of outstanding debts;
(e) acting as the principal in the issuance of Government debt securities on
behalf of the National Treasury;
(f) monitor and evaluate all borrowing and debt-related transactions to
ensure that they are within the guidelines and risk parameters of the debt
management strategy;
(g) process the issuance of loan guarantees including assessment and
management of risks in national government guarantees.
(h) transact in derivative financial instruments in accordance with best
international practices benchmarked to the debt management offices of
other governments that are internationally respected for their practices.
Role of Cabinet Secretary in Public Debt Management Office.
64. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall—
(a) develop the policy and financial framework in accordance with
Constitutional principles within which the Public Debt Management Office
operates;
(b) delegate to the Head of the Public Debt Management Office the operational
decisions on borrowing and debt management and the day-to-day
management of the Office;
(c) ensure that the Public Debt Management Office has the resources and
skills to manage the debt and borrowing according to international best
practices for liability management; and
(d) be accountable to Parliament for the work of the Public Debt Management
Office.
(2) The Public Debt Management Office shall prepare and submit to the Cabinet
Secretary and the Commission on Revenue Allocation the following reports—
(a) the Medium Term Debt Management Strategy consistent with the Budget
Policy Statement;
(b) the government borrowing plan for the approved Annual Budget;
(c) the statistical and analytical reports on debt and borrowing; and

-- 56 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 57
(d) the annual performance reports of the Public Debt Management Office.
(3) The reports referred to in subsection (2) shall be published and publicised
and a copy of each sent to each county government.
(4) The Public Debt Management Office may appoint agents to provide technical
advice or undertake administrative functions for the management of debts provided
that control and accountability for these functions remain with the Cabinet
Secretary.
Relationship with county treasuries in debt management.
65. (1) At the request of a County Treasury, the Public Debt Management Office
shall assist the county government in its debt management and borrowing.
(2) At the request of the Public Debt Management Office, the County Treasury
shall supply the Public Debt Management Office with any information that shall
enable it to execute its mandate efficiently.
The Judiciary, Parliament, Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices
Accounting officers of Judiciary, Parliament, constitutional commissions and
independent offices.
66.
Subject to the Constitution, the accounting officers of the Judiciary,
Parliamentary Service Commission, constitutional commissions and independent
offices shall monitor, evaluate and oversee the management of public finances in
their respective entities, including—
(a) the promotion and enforcement of transparency, effective management and
accountability with regard to the use of public finances;
(b) ensuring that accounting standards are applied;
(c) the implementation of financial policies in relation to public finances;
(d) ensuring proper management and control of, and accounting for, their
finances in order to promote the efficient and effective use of budgetary
resources;
(e) the preparation of annual estimates of expenditures;
(f) acting as custodian of the entity’s assets, except where provided otherwise by
any other legislation or the Constitution;
(g) monitoring the management of public finances and their financial
performance;
(h) making quarterly reports to the National Assembly on the implementation of
their budget; and

-- 57 of 625 --

58 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(i) taking such other actions, not inconsistent with the Constitution, as shall
further the implementation of this Act.
[ Act No. 38 of 2016, s. 58.]
Responsibilities of the accounting officers of the
national government and the national government entities
Designation of accounting officers for national government.
67. (1) The Cabinet Secretary, except as otherwise provided by law, shall in
writing designate accounting officers to be responsible for the proper management
of the finances of the different national government entities as may be specified in
the different designations.
(2) Except as otherwise stated in other legislation, the person responsible for
the administration of a Constitutional Commission or institution or Independent
Office shall be the accounting officer responsible for managing the finances of that
Commission, institution or Independent Office.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall ensure that at any time there is an accounting
officer in each national government entity.
Responsibilities of accounting officers for national government entities,
Parliament and the Judiciary.
68. (1) An accounting officer for a national government entity, Parliamentary
Service Commission and the Judiciary shall be accountable to the National Assembly
for ensuring that the resources of the respective entity for which he or she is the
accounting officer are used in a way that is—
(a) lawful and authorised; and
(b) effective, efficient, economical and transparent.
(2) In the performance of a function under subsection (1), an accounting officer
shall—
(a) ensure that all expenditure made by the entity complies with subsection
(1);
(b) ensure that the entity keeps financial and accounting records that comply
with this Act;
(c) ensure that all financial and accounting records the entity keeps in any
form, including in electronic form are adequately protected and backed up;
(d) ensure that all contracts entered into by the entity are lawful and are
complied with;
(e) ensure that all applicable accounting and financial controls, systems,
standards, laws and procedures are followed when procuring or disposing
of goods and services and that, in the case of goods, adequate
arrangements are made for their custody, safeguarding and maintenance;
(f) bring any matter to the attention of the Cabinet Secretary responsible for
the entity, or the Chief Justice or the Speaker of the National Assembly if, in
the accounting officer’s opinion, a decision or policy or proposed decision

-- 58 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 59
or policy of the entity may result in resources being used in a way that is
contrary to subsection (1);
(g) prepare a strategic plan for the entity in conformity with the medium term
fiscal framework and fiscal policy objectives of the national government;
(h) prepare estimates of expenditure and revenues of the entity in conformity
with the strategic plan referred to in paragraph (g);
(i) submit the estimates of the public entity which is not a state corporation
to the Cabinet Secretary;
(j) submit the estimates of a public entity which is a state corporation to
the Cabinet Secretary responsible for that state corporation who, after
approving it, shall forward it to the Cabinet Secretary;
(k) prepare annual financial statements for each financial year within three
months after the end of the financial year, and submit them to the
Controller of Budget and the Auditor-General for audit, and in the case of
a national government entity, forward a copy to the National Treasury;
(l) take appropriate measures to resolve any issues arising from audit which
may remain outstanding;
(m) provide information on any fraud, losses, or any violation of subsection
(1) and explanation for the actions taken to prevent a similar problem in
future;
(n) provide the National Treasury and any other office, where relevant, with
any information it may require to fulfil its functions under this Act; and
(o) in case of a national government entity, carry out such other functions as
may be specified by the Cabinet Secretary.
(3) If the concerns referred to in subsection (2)(f) are not adequately addressed by
the Cabinet Secretary or the Chief Justice or the Speaker of the National Assembly,
the accounting officer shall bring those concerns to the attention of Parliament.
(4) Not later than three months after the National Assembly has adopted a report
by a relevant committee of the National Assembly in respect of a report submitted
by the Controller of Budget under Article 228(6) of the Constitution, an accounting
officer shall—
(a) prepare a report on actions taken by the entity to implement any
recommendations made in the committee’s report as adopted by the
National Assembly; and
(b) submit the report to the National Assembly and in case of a national
government entity, copy to the National Treasury and the Controller of
Budget.
(5) A report referred to in subsection (4) shall be published and publicised.
Accounting officer of a national government entity may write-off loss.
69. (1) An accounting officer for a national government entity may write-off
any loss not exceeding a prescribed amount, and in circumstances prescribed by
regulations for the purposes of this section.

-- 59 of 625 --

60 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(2) An accounting officer for a national government entity, may with the approval
of the Cabinet Secretary, write off a loss exceeding the amount referred to in
subsection (1) but not exceeding a further amount and in circumstances prescribed
by regulations.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary may, with the approval of Cabinet, authorise an
accounting officer to writeoff a loss exceeding the amount referred to in subsection
(2).
(4) An accounting officer for a national government entity shall maintain a record
of any losses that are written off during a financial year and shall include the record
in the entity’s financial statements for that year.
Spending authority of accounting officer.
70. If a national government entity has expenditures that are charged on the
Consolidated Fund under the Constitution or an Act of Parliament, the accounting
officer has the authority to spend the money in accordance with the purposes
specified in legislation without an appropriation.
Accounting officer for national government entity may make cash advances.
71. (1) An accounting officer for a national government entity may authorise
payment of cash advances to public officers to enable them make payments for the
entity or in the course of their duties.
(2) A public officer to whom cash advance is made under subsection (1), shall
account for the advance within a reasonable period.
(3) A public officer to whom cash advance has been made under subsection
(1), shall return the balance of the cash advanced together with signed supporting
documents for the expenditure incurred in accordance with any requirement set out
in any of the following—
(a) the documents used to apply for or authorise the advance;
(b) regulations prescribed for the purpose of this section; and
(c) any written notice given to the officer by the accounting officer.
(4) If a public officer to whom cash advance is made under subsection (1) fails to
account for the advance, or fails to return it as required by subsection (3)—
(a) the amount of the advance not accounted for or not returned becomes a
debt owed by the officer;
(b) the debt becomes subject to the payment of interest at a rate prescribed by
regulations for the purpose of this subsection; and
(c) the debt, including the interest on it, is recoverable by that entity by
making a deduction from any salary or other amount that is payable to the
officer.

-- 60 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 61
Accounting officer to manage assets and liabilities of national government
entities.
72. (1) The accounting officer for a national government entity shall—
(a) be responsible for the management of the entity’s assets and liabilities;
and
(b) manage those assets in a way which ensures that the national government
entity achieves value for money in acquiring, using and disposing of those
assets.
(2) The accounting officer for a national government entity may dispose of
assets only in accordance with an Act of Parliament pursuant to Article 227 of
the Constitution and shall ensure that the proceeds from all asset disposals are
deposited into a bank account of the entity.
(3) A national government entity shall not loan or transfer assets to any person
or organisation or permit any person or organisation to use assets for purposes other
than carrying out the functions of the entity, except in accordance with an Act of
Parliament enacted pursuant to Article 227 of the Constitution.
(4) Regulations may provide for the management and disposal of Government
assets and for the monitoring of the management and disposal of those assets
by national government entities in accordance with an Act of Parliament enacted
pursuant to Article 227 of the Constitution.
National government entity to maintain internal auditing arrangements.
73. (1) Every national government entity shall ensure that it complies with this
Act and—
(a) has appropriate arrangements in place for conducting internal audit
according to the guidelines of the Accounting Standards Board; and
(b) where any regulations are in force under subsection (2), those regulations
are complied with.
(2) Regulations may prescribe requirements to be complied with in conducting
internal audits.
(3) The Internal Auditor-General Department of the National Treasury shall
ensure that its arrangements for conducting internal auditing include—
(a) reviewing the governance mechanisms of the entity and mechanisms for
transparency and accountability with regard to the finances and assets of
the entity;
(b) conducting risk-based, value-for-money and systems audits aimed at
strengthening internal control mechanisms that could have an impact on
achievement of the strategic objectives of the entity;
(c) verifying the existence of assets administered by the entity and ensuring
that there are proper safeguards for their protection;
(d) providing assurance that appropriate institutional policies and procedures
and good business practices are followed by the entity; and

-- 61 of 625 --

62 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(e) evaluating the adequacy and reliability of information available to
management for making decisions with regard to the entity and its
operations.
(4) A national government entity shall ensure that internal audits in respect of
the entity are conducted in accordance with international best practices.
(5) Every national government public entity shall establish an audit committee
whose composition and functions shall be as prescribed by the regulations.
Disciplinary measures against public and accounting officers.
74. (1) Subject to the Constitution, the Public Officers Ethics Act (Cap. 185B) and
the Public Service codes of ethics or any other relevant laws, if an accounting officer
reasonably believes that a public officer employed by a national government entity is
engaging in, or has engaged in improper conduct within the meaning of subsection
(4) in relation to the resources of the entity, the accounting officer shall—
(a) take appropriate measures to discipline the public officer in accordance
with regulations; or
(b) refer the matter to the relevant office or body in terms of the statutory and
other conditions of appointment or employment applicable to that public
officer.
(2) If a Cabinet Secretary reasonably believes that an accounting officer is
engaging in or has engaged in improper conduct within the meaning of subsection
(4), the Cabinet Secretary shall—
(a) take such measures as may be provided in regulations; or
(b) refer the matter to the relevant office or body in terms of the statutory
and other conditions of appointment or employment applicable to that
accounting officer.
(3) The measures referred to in subsection (2)(a) include revoking the position
as accounting officer.
(4) For the purposes of this section, a public officer or accounting officer engages
in improper conduct in relation to a national government entity if the officer—
(a) contravenes or fails to comply with this Act, including their accounting
responsibilities;
(b) undermines any financial management procedures or controls that apply
to the entity;
(c) makes or permits expenditure that is unlawful or has not been authorised
by the entity; or
(d) fails, without reasonable excuse, to pay eligible and approved bills
promptly in circumstances where funds are provided for.
(5) Disciplinary measures under this section may not be taken against a public
officer or accounting officer under subsection (1)(a) or (2)(a) unless the officer has
been given an opportunity to be heard in relation to the alleged improper conduct.

-- 62 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 63
Receivers and collectors of national government revenue
Receivers and collectors of national government.
75. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall, in writing, designate persons as receivers
of national government revenue under Article 209(1), (2) and (4) of the Constitution
and who shall be responsible for receiving and accounting for such national
government revenue provided in any law or in regulations as the Cabinet Secretary
may specify in the letter of appointment.
(2) A receiver of national government revenue is responsible to the Cabinet
Secretary for the collection of revenue for which he or she is responsible and such
revenue shall be separately accounted for in accordance with Articles 206(1) and
209(1), (2) and (4) of the Constitution.
Receiver may authorise a public officer to be collector of national government
revenue.
76. (1) A receiver of the national government revenue may authorise a public
officer employed by the national government or any of its entities to be a collector
of revenue for the national government and remit it to the receiver.
(2) Any public officer, other than a receiver or collector of revenue for the national
government, who collects revenue for that national government shall, not later than
three days after receiving it, deliver the revenue to a receiver or collector of revenue
for the national government.
(3) A receiver of revenue for the national government shall provide monthly
statements to the National Treasury and the Commission on Revenue Allocation.
Powers of the Cabinet Secretary to waive or vary tax, fees or charges.
77. The Cabinet Secretary may waive a national tax, a fee or charge imposed by
the National Government and its entities in accordance with criteria prescribed in
regulations provided that—
(a) the National Treasury shall maintain a public record of each waiver
together with the reason for the waiver and report on each waiver in
accordance with Section 82 of this Act;
(b) such a waiver or variation has been authorised by an Act of Parliament; and
(c) a State Officer may not be excluded from payment of a tax, fee or charge by
reason of the office of the State Officer or the nature of work of the State
Officer.
Kenya Revenue Authority to be collector of national government revenue.
78. The Kenya Revenue Authority, shall be the collector of national government
revenue for the purposes of this Part.
Obligations of public officers
Public officers to comply with laws relating to national government resources.
79. (1) Every public officer employed in a national government state organ or
public entity shall comply with the Constitution and all laws relating to the conduct

-- 63 of 625 --

64 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
of public officers when carrying out a responsibility or exercising a power under this
Act.
(2) Without prejudice to provisions under subsection (1), a public officer
employed in a national government state organ or public entity shall—
(a) comply with the provisions of this Act so far as they are applicable to the
officer; and
(b) ensure that the resources within the officer’s area of responsibility are used
in a way which—
(i) is lawful and authorised; and
(ii) is effective, efficient, economical and transparent;
(c) within the officer’s area of responsibility—
(i) ensure that adequate arrangements are made for the proper use,
custody, safeguarding and maintenance of public property; and
(ii) use the officer’s best efforts to prevent any damage from being done
to the financial interests of the national government.
Financial reporting by the National Treasury and national government entities
The National Treasury to prepare consolidated annual financial statement.
80. (1) At the end of each financial year, the National Treasury shall prepare
for the national government, clear and comprehensible annual financial statements
that consolidate the financial statements prepared by all national government
entities, in accordance with formats prescribed by the Accounting Standards Board.
(2) The National Treasury shall include in the consolidated financial
statements—
(a) a statement of all monies paid into and out of the National Exchequer
Account;
(b) a summary of—
(i) the appropriation accounts and statements prepared by accounting
officers under section 81; and
(ii) the statements prepared by receivers of revenue under section 82;
(c) a statement of payments made out of the National Exchequer Account that
are authorised by legislation other than an Appropriation Act;
(d) a statement of the total amount of debt of national government that is
outstanding at the end of the financial year;
(e) a statement of any waivers under Article 210 of the Constitution; and
(f) such other statements as the National Assembly may require.
(3) The National Treasury shall ensure that the statements and summaries
referred to in subsection (2) are in a form that complies with the relevant accounting
standards prescribed and published by the Accounting Standards Board.

-- 64 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 65
(4) Not later than four months after the end of the financial year, the National
Treasury shall—
(a) submit the financial statements and summaries referred to in subsection
(1) to the Auditor-General and a copy to the Controller of Budget and the
Commission on Revenue Allocation; and
(b) publish and publicise the statements.
Annual reporting by accounting officers.
81. (1) At the end of each financial year, the accounting officer for a national
government entity shall prepare financial statements in respect of the entity.
(2) The accounting officer shall include in the financial statement—
(a) appropriation accounts, showing—
(i) the services for which the appropriated money was spent;
(ii) the actual amount spent on each service;
(iii) the status of each vote compared with the appropriation for the vote;
(iv) a statement explaining any variations between the actual
expenditure and the sums voted; and
(v) any other information specified by the National Treasury;
(b) a statement of the entity’s debt which is outstanding at the end of the
financial year;
(c) a statement of the entity’s debt guaranteed by the national government as
at the end of the financial year;
(d) a statement of the entity’s assets and liabilities as at the end of the
financial year in respect of the recurrent Vote, development Vote and funds
and deposits;
(e) a statement of the accounting policies followed in preparing the financial
statement; and
(f) a statement of the national government entity’s performance against
predetermined objectives.
(3) The accounting officer shall prepare the financial statements in a form that
complies with the relevant accounting standards prescribed and published by the
Accounting Standards Board from time to time.
(4) Not later than three months after the end of each financial year, the
accounting officer for the entity shall—
(a) submit the entity’s financial statements to the Auditor-General and a copy
of the statement to the Controller of Budget, the National Treasury and
the Commission on Revenue Allocation; and
(b) publish and publicise the financial statements.
(5) In the case of an entity that is a state corporation, the accounting officer shall
submit the corporation’s financial statements to the Cabinet Secretary responsible

-- 65 of 625 --

66 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
for matters relating to that corporation who shall, upon approving it submit a copy
to the Cabinet Secretary.
Annual reporting by receivers of revenue.
82. (1) At the end of each financial year, a receiver of revenue for the national
government shall prepare an account in respect of the revenue received and collected
by the receiver during that financial year.
(2) An account prepared under subsection (1) shall include—
(a) a statement of receipts and disbursements in such form as the National
Treasury may direct; and
(b) a statement of arrears of revenue.
(3) Not later than three months after the end of the financial year, the receiver
of revenue for the national government shall—
(a) submit the accounts to the Auditor-General and a copy to the
National Treasury, Controller of Budget and the Commission on Revenue
Allocation; and
(b) publish and publicise the financial statements.
(4) Not later than three months after the end of each financial year, a receiver of
revenue for the national government shall submit to the Auditor-General a report
with respect to all waivers and variations of taxes, fees or charges granted by the
receiver or collector during that year.
(5) The receiver shall include in the report under subsection (4) the following
details in respect of each waiver or variation—
(a) the full name of each person benefitting from the waiver or variation;
(b) the amount of tax, fee or charge affected by the waiver or variation;
(c) the year to which the waiver or variation relates;
(d) the reasons for waive or variation; and
(e) the law in terms of which the waiver was granted.
(6) The reports referred to in subsection (4) shall be published and publicised.
Accounting officer to prepare quarterly reports for national government
entity.
83. (1) An accounting officer for a national government entity shall prepare a
report for each quarter of the financial year in respect of the entity.
(2) In preparing a quarterly report for a national government entity, the
accounting officer shall ensure that the report—
(a) contains information on the financial and non-financial performance of
the entity; and
(b) is in a form that complies with the standards prescribed and published by
the Accounting Standards Board from time to time.

-- 66 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 67
(3) Not later than fifteen days after the end of each quarter, the accounting officer
shall submit the quarterly report to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for the entity
and the National Treasury.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for an entity shall forward a copy of the
report to the Cabinet Secretary and Controller of Budget.
(5) Not later than forty five days after the end of each quarter, the National
Treasury shall—
(a) consolidate the quarterly reports and submit them to the National
Assembly with copies of the reports to the Controller of Budget, Auditor-
General and the Commission on Revenue Allocation; and
(b) publish and publicise the reports.
(6) In the case of an entity that is a state corporation, the accounting officer
for the corporation shall submit the quarterly report to the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for the corporation who shall, upon approving it, forward a copy to the
Cabinet Secretary.
Administrators of national public funds to prepare annual financial
statements.
84. (1) The administrator of a national public fund established by the
Constitution or an Act of Parliament shall prepare financial statements for the fund
for each financial year in a form prescribed by the Accounting Standards Board.
(2) In preparing a financial statement for a national public fund, the
administrator shall ensure that the report contains information on the financial and
non-financial performance of the national public fund.
(3) Not later than three months after the end of each financial year, the
administrator of a national public fund shall submit the financial statements
prepared under this section to the Auditor-General.
(4) The administrator shall submit a copy of the report to the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for the fund.
Quarterly reporting by administrators of national public funds.
85. The administrator of a national public fund established by the Constitution
or an Act of Parliament shall prepare quarterly financial statements for the national
public fund in a form prescribed by the Accounting Standards Board.
Establishment and dissolution of state corporations and additional
requirements for state corporations and government-linked corporations
Establishment and dissolution of a state corporation.
86. (1) A state corporation may be established or dissolved only with the
prior approval of the Cabinet, which approval may be given only after taking
into account any recommendations made by the National Treasury regarding the
financial implications of establishing or dissolving the corporation.
(2) Regulations shall prescribe the criteria to be used in establishing or dissolving
state corporations and the regulations shall be tabled in Parliament for approval.

-- 67 of 625 --

68 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Restrictions on national government investing in government-linked
corporations.
87. The national government or national government entity may not invest—
(a) in a state corporation; or
(b) in a government-linked company,
without the prior approval of the Cabinet, which approval may be given only after
taking into account any recommendations of the National Treasury regarding the
financial implications of the investment.
Cabinet Secretary in charge of state corporation to monitor its performance.
88. (1) The respective Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to a
state corporation is responsible for monitoring—
(a) the financial performance of that state corporation and government-linked
corporations; and
(b) the performance of that state corporation and the activities affecting its
financial performance; and
reporting to the Cabinet on the financial performance of the state corporation.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall—
(a) analyse financial and other reports that are required to be prepared by a
state corporation under the State Corporations Act (Cap. 446) or any other
relevant Act;
(b) report to the Cabinet on the financial performance of those state
corporations; and
(c) make recommendations to the Cabinet as to how a particular state
corporation or government-linked corporation could improve its financial
performance.
Annual reporting by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to
public investments.
89. (1) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to public
investments shall prepare and submit to the National Assembly, not later than four
months after the end of each financial year, a consolidated report summarising the
extent of national government involvement or investment in, or funding of, all state
corporations and government-linked corporations for that financial year.
(2) The report under subsection (1) shall include information on—
(a) the date of incorporation and objects of the corporation;
(b) the amount of national government shareholding, directly or indirectly, in
the state corporation;
(c) any changes in the shareholding of the state corporation during the
financial year;

-- 68 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 69
(d) the amount of any funding in the form of grants or subsidies provided by
the national government to the state corporation or government-linked
state corporations, excluding profit-making state corporation, during the
financial year;
(e) the amount of any loans made by the national government to the state
corporation, and the amount of any guarantees issued by the national
government in respect of the state corporation, during the financial year;
(f) the cumulative amount of undischarged loans and guarantees in respect
of the state corporation;
(g) the amount of the profit or loss of the state corporation for the financial
year;
(h) the amount of any revenue received by the national government from the
state corporation during the financial year, including dividends, interest
and proceeds from any divestiture of assets of the state corporation;
(i) the amount of payments made, or losses incurred, by the national
government to meet contingent liabilities as a result of loans or
guarantees during the financial year, including payments made in respect
of guarantees, loan write-offs or waiver of interest on loans; and
(j) an assessment of the financial and related non-financial performance of
the state corporation for the financial year.
(3) Once every three years, the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating
to public investments shall prepare a report on the assessment of the national
government’s continued involvement or investment in, or funding of, the state
corporation or government linked corporation.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to public investments
shall submit copies of the reports referred to in subsections (2) and (3) to the Cabinet
Secretary, the Controller of Budget, the Commission on Revenue Allocation and to
the Auditor-General.
Parliament may extend time limit.
90. Any House of Parliament may, by resolution, extend the time limit, other
than a time limit set in the Constitution, for submitting a statement or other
document required to be submitted to it under this Act.
Definitions for purposes of sections 86, 87, 88 and 89.
91.
For the purposes of sections 86, 87, 88 and 89—
(a) “government-linked corporation” means a corporation in which the
national government or national government entity is a shareholder with less
than fifty percent of the share capital of the corporation; and
(b) “invest” means any form of funding provided to a state corporation, including
providing share capital, loans, guarantees, grants or subsidies.

-- 69 of 625 --

70 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Resolution of operational and financial problems of
national government entities and county governments
Responsibility for avoiding, identifying and resolving financial problems.
92. (1) A State organ or other public entity is primarily responsible for
foreseeing, identifying, avoiding and resolving financial problems in that State
organ or public entity.
(2) A State organ or other public entity shall ensure that the conduct of financial
management is in accordance with the Constitution and this Act.
(3) If a State organ or other public entity encounters a serious financial problem
or anticipates serious challenges in performing its financial function or meeting its
financial commitments, it shall immediately—
(a) seek solutions to resolve the financial problems;
(b) notify the Cabinet Secretary or the County Executive Committee member
for finance where the State organ is a county government organ;
(c) notify the Controller of Budget and the Commission on Revenue
Allocation; and
(d) inform the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council, of the nature
of the financial problem and proposed remedial measures it proposes to
put in place.
Assessment of the need for intervention in accordance with Article 225 of the
Constitution.
93. (1) If the Cabinet Secretary becomes aware of financial problems in a State
organ or other public entity, the Cabinet Secretary shall promptly—
(a) ascertain the seriousness of the problem and the proposed remedial
measures or solution to the financial problem by the State organ or public
entity; and
(b) determine whether the situation constitutes a serious material breach or
persistent material breach requiring stopping of transfer of funds under
Article 225(3) of the Constitution.
(2) In the case of a State organ which is a national government entity, if
the financial problem has been caused by or resulted in a failure by the national
government entity—
(a) to perform its functions of comply with obligations imposed under the
Constitution or any other Act; or
(b) to meet its financial commitments, the Cabinet Secretary shall, guided by
regulations, consider whether or not to take action under Article 225(3) of
the Constitution and in terms of this Act.

-- 70 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 71
(3) In the case of a State organ which is a county government or county
government entity, if it—
(a) does not operate a financial management system that complies with the
requirements prescribed in this Act and the financial problem has met
conditions for intervention in terms of Article 190(3) of the Constitution;
or
(b) is unable to meet its financial commitments as set out in the Constitution
or this Act, this shall constitute a serious material breach or persistent
material breach for purposes of stopping transfer of funds under Article
225(3) of the Constitution.
(4) When determining whether the conditions for the Cabinet Secretary to stop
transfer of funds referred to in Article 225(3) of the Constitution are met, all relevant
facts shall be considered before the Cabinet Secretary acts.
Additional indicators of serious or persistent material breach.
94. (1) The following factors, singly or in combination, may further indicate that
a State organ or public entity is in serious material breach or persistent material
breach of the measures established under this Act—
(a) the State organ or public entity—
(i) has failed to make any payments as and when due;
(ii) has defaulted on financial obligations for financial reasons;
(iii) had an operating deficit in excess of a percentage of revenue in
the most recent financial year for which financial information is
available as prescribed in regulations; or
(iv) is more than sixty days late in submitting its annual financial
statements to the Auditor-General in accordance with this Act or
any other legislation;
(b) the State organ or public entity has failed to make any other payment
as and when due, which individually or in the aggregate is more than
an amount as may be prescribed or, if none is prescribed, more than
two percent of the State organ’s or public entity’s budgeted operating
expenditure;
(c) the Controller of Budget has raised material issues in their quarterly
report;
(d) the Auditor-General has withheld an opinion or issued a disclaimer due to
inadequacies in the financial statements or records of the State organ or
public entity or has issued an opinion which identifies a serious financial
problem in the State organ or public entity; or
(e) recurring or continuous failure by a State organ or public entity to meet
its financial commitments which substantially impairs the State organ’s
or public entity’s ability to procure goods, services or credit on usual
commercial terms.

-- 71 of 625 --

72 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(2) Provisions of this sections shall not apply with respect—
(a) disputed obligations which are subject to litigation in a court of law,
provided such litigation is not instituted to avoid an intervention; or
(b) obligations explicitly waived by creditors.
Stoppage of funds process in national government entity.
95. Where the Cabinet Secretary finds a State organ which is a national
government entity to be in serious or persistent material breach of its obligations or
financial commitments, the Cabinet Secretary shall—
(a) determine the reasons for the breach; and
(b) assess the national government entity’s financial state.
Stoppage of funds process in county government.
96. (1) Where the. Cabinet Secretary finds a State organ which is a county
government entity to be in serious or persistent material breach of its obligations or
financial commitments, the Cabinet Secretary shall, in accordance with Article 225
of the Constitution, immediately stop the transfer of funds.
(2) Within seven days of stopping the transfer of funds under subsection (1), the
Cabinet Secretary shall inform—
(a) the accounting officer, of the State organ or public entity; or
(b) the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to
intergovernmental relations;
(c) County Executive Committee member responsible for finance;
(d) the Controller of Budget;
(e) the Commission on Revenue Allocation; and
(f) Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall in the alternative promptly—
(a) inform the County Executive Committee member responsible for finance;
and
(b) request the Auditor-General to—
(i) determine the reasons for the breach;
(ii) assess the county government financial state; and
(iii) submit to the Cabinet Secretary and County Executive member for
finance a report within thirty days from the date of the request.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary may prescribe regulations in relation to the process of
stoppage of transfer of funds.
Procedure for stoppage of funds.
97. (1) Where the Cabinet Secretary makes a decision to stop the transfer of funds
to a State organ or public entity in accordance with Article 225(3) of the Constitution

-- 72 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 73
and provisions of this Act, the Cabinet Secretary shall stop the payment and inform
the Controller of Budget in respect of—
(a) the date from when the stoppage of transfer of funds takes effect; and
(b) the nature of serious material breaches, or persistent material breaches,
committed by the State organ or public entity.
(2) Not later than seven days after the date of the decision to stop the transfer of
funds, the Cabinet Secretary shall seek approval from Parliament.
(3) Within fourteen days after the decision to stop the transfer of funds under
subsection (1), the Controller of Budget shall investigate the matter and submit a
report to Parliament in accordance with Article 225(7) of the Constitution.
(4) Parliament shall, within thirty days of the decision by the Cabinet Secretary
to stop the transfer of funds, approve or renew the decision of the Cabinet Secretary
to stop the transfer of funds and the Cabinet Secretary shall abide by the decision
of Parliament.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary may not stop the transfer of more than fifty percent
of funds due to a county government.
(6) Any person may exercise his or her right to petition Parliament in terms of
Article 119 of the Constitution in respect of the action taken to stop the transfer of
funds.
Renewal of decision to stop funds and termination of stoppage.
98. (1) Where the Cabinet Secretary has applied to Parliament to renew a
decision to stop the transfer of funds for a period beyond the sixty days, a time
allowed by the Constitution, as soon as practicable but not later than fourteen days
after being informed of the decision to renew the period, the Controller of Budget
shall prepare a report on the matter to Parliament.
(2) The report referred to in subsection (1) shall provide an independent opinion
on findings on details of the material breach or persistent material breaches in such
a manner as to allow Parliament to make a decision within thirty days on whether
or not to approve the renewal of the decision to stop the transfer of funds.
(3) An intervention based on Article 225(3) of the Constitution and provisions
of this Act shall end when—
(a) the serious or persistent material breach in the State organ’s or public
entity’s financial affairs has been resolved;
(b) the State organ’s or public entity’s ability to meet its obligations to provide
basic services or its financial commitments is secured; or
(c) Parliament has declined to renew the Cabinet Secretary’s decision to stop
transfer of funds.
(4) Where Parliament has not renewed a decision in terms of Article 225(6) of
the Constitution to stop the transfer of funds, all funds held during the period of the
stoppage shall be released within a period not exceeding fifteen days.

-- 73 of 625 --

74 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Provision for a recovery plan.
99. (1) If as a result of an assessment using criteria provided for under this Act,
the Cabinet Secretary determines that there is a serious or persistent material breach
or that a county government is unable to perform its functions, the Cabinet Secretary
shall—
(a) notify the county government and the Cabinet Secretary responsible for
matters relating to intergovernmental relations, of the finding and the
intention to intervene;
(b) consult the county governor to obtain the county government’s
cooperation in the development and implementation of a recovery plan,
including the approval of a budget and legislative measures giving effect
to the recovery plan;
(c) in consultation with the county government, prepare an appropriate
recovery plan for the county government; and
(d) notify the Controller of Budget, Senate, the Joint Intergovernmental
Technical Committee and the Auditor-General of the findings and the
content of the recovery plan.
(2) The approved recovery plan by the Joint Committee shall form the basis for
releasing funds withheld during the period of stoppage and the release of subsequent
transfers to a state organ or public entity.
(3) The purpose of the recovery plan referred to in subsection (1) shall be to
secure the county government’s ability to meet its obligations to provide basic
services or its financial commitments.
(4) The recovery plan under this section shall—
(a) identify the financial problems;
(b) be designed to place the county government in a sound and sustainable
financial condition as quickly as possible;
(c) state the principal objectives of the plan and ways and means for achieving
those objectives;
(d) provide budget parameters which bind the county government for a
specified period or until stated conditions have been met;
(e) identify specific revenue raising measures that are necessary for financial
recovery, including the rates at which tariffs should be set to achieve
financial recovery;
(f) set out a specific strategy for addressing the entity’s problems, including
a strategy for reducing wasteful expenditure and increasing the collection
of revenue, as may be necessary;
(g) identify the human resources and the source of those resources;
(h) describe the anticipated time frame for the recovery, and the milestones
to be achieved; and

-- 74 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 75
(i) identify what actions are necessary for the implementation of the plan,
distinguishing between actions to be taken by the entity and actions to be
taken by other parties.
(5) In addition to provisions under subsection (4), the recovery plan may—
(a) provide for the liquidation of specific assets, excluding those needed for
the provision of the minimum level of basic services;
(b) provide for special measures to prevent unauthorised irregular and
wasteful expenditure and other losses; and
(c) identify any actual and potential sources of revenue.
(6) The intervention shall adhere to the values and principles of the Constitution
and provisions of any other relevant law.
Establishment of the Joint Intergovernmental Technical Committee.
100. (1) There is established a committee to be known as the Joint
Intergovernmental Technical Committee thereinafter referred to as “Joint
Committee”) and shall comprise of—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary;
(b) the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to
intergovernmental relations;
(c) a representative of the county government or county government entity
concerned;
(d) a representative of the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council;
and
(e) a representative of the Commission on Revenue Allocation.
(2) The Joint Committee may invite or enlist any other persons to assist it in
performing its functions under this section.
(3) the Joint Committee shall meet at least once every three months to review
any action of intervention referred to in this Part, and establish—
(a) the progress on resolving the county government’s financial problems and
the recovery plan; and
(b) the effectiveness of the recovery plan.
(4) The Joint Committee shall, every four months, submit progress reports and,
where appropriate, a final report on the intervention to the Cabinet Secretary, the
County Executive Committee member for finance, the relevant county Assembly, the
Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council and the Senate.

-- 75 of 625 --

76 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Termination of intervention.
101. (1) An intervention based on Article 190(3)(b) of the Constitution shall
end—
(a) if it is terminated in terms of Article 190(5) of the Constitution where there
has been a breach of the procedure prescribed in the regulations approved
by the Senate; or
(b) where the Joint Committee is satisfied that the county government is able
and willing to fulfil its obligation in terms of legislation or the Constitution
that gave rise to the intervention; and
(c) when the Joint Committee determines that the financial problem which
caused the failure by the county government to comply with its obligation
is resolved; and
(d) when the Joint Committee finds that the county government is operating
a financial management system that complies with legislation.
(2) At the end of an intervention, the Joint Committee shall notify—
(a) Parliament;
(b) the relevant County Assembly; and
(c) the Controller of Budget.
(3) The Joint Committee shall publish and publicise the end of the intervention.
PART IV – COUNTY GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITIES WITH
RESPECT TO MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF PUBLIC FINANCE
County government responsibilities in public finance.
102. (1) Each county government shall ensure adherence to—
(a) the principles of public finance set out in Chapter Twelve of the
Constitution;
(b) the fiscal responsibility principles provided in section 107 under this Act;
(c) national values set out in the Constitution; and
(d) any other requirements of this Act.
(2) The County Executive Committee shall observe principles of collective
responsibility in exercising their functions under this Act.
(3) In making decisions a county assembly shall take cognisance of Article 216(2)
of the Constitution.
Establishment of county treasuries.
103. (1) There is established for each county government, an entity to be known
as County Treasury.
(2) The County Treasury shall comprise—
(a) the County Executive Committee member for finance;

-- 76 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 77
(b) the Chief Officer; and
(c) the department or departments of the County Treasury responsible for
financial and fiscal matters.
(3) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall be the head of
the County Treasury.
Responsibilities and powers of a County Treasury
General responsibilities of a County Treasury.
104. (1) Subject to the Constitution, a County Treasury shall monitor, evaluate
and oversee the management of public finances and economic affairs of the county
government including—
(a) developing and implementing financial and economic policies in the
county;
(b) preparing the annual budget for the county and co-ordinating the
preparation of estimates of revenue and expenditure of the county
government;
(c) co-ordinating the implementation of the budget of the county
government;
(d) mobilising resources for funding the budgetary requirements of the
county government and putting in place mechanisms to raise revenue and
resources;
(e) managing the county government’s public debt and other obligations and
developing a framework of debt control for the county;
(f) consolidating the annual appropriation accounts and other financial
statements of the county government in a format determined by the
Accounting Standards Board;
(g) acting as custodian of the inventory of the county government’s assets
except where provided otherwise by other legislation or the Constitution;
(h) ensuring compliance with accounting standards prescribed and published
by the Accounting Standards Board from time to time;
(i) ensuring proper management and control of, and accounting for the
finances of the county government and its entities in order to promote
efficient and effective use of the county’s budgetary resources;
(j) maintaining proper accounts and other records in respect of the County
Revenue Fund, the County Emergencies Fund and other public funds
administered by the county government;
(k) monitoring the county government’s entities to ensure compliance
with this Act and effective management of their funds, efficiency and
transparency and, in particular, proper accountability for the expenditure
of those funds;

-- 77 of 625 --

78 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(l) assisting county government entities in developing their capacity for
efficient, effective and transparent financial management, upon request;
(m) providing the National Treasury with information which it may require to
carry out its responsibilities under the Constitution and this Act;
(n) issuing circulars with respect to financial matters relating to county
government entities;
(o) advising the county government entities, the County Executive Committee
and the county assembly on financial matters;
(p) strengthening financial and fiscal relations between the national
government and county governments in performing their functions;
(q) reporting regularly to the county assembly on the implementation of the
annual county budget; and
(r) taking any other action to further the implementation of this Act in
relation to the county.
Powers of a County Treasury.
105. (1) A County Treasury has such powers as are necessary to enable it to carry
out its functions and responsibilities under this Act including—
(a) with prior notice, access any system of public financial management used
by any of the county government entities and the internal controls used
to monitor the system;
(b) taking appropriate measures, including the stoppage of funds, to deal with
any failure of a county government entity to comply with this Act;
(c) with prior notice, accessing the premises of a county government entity
and inspecting all records and other documents relating to the financial
affairs of that county government entity, kept by that entity;
(d) requiring county government entities to comply with all applicable norms
or standards regarding accounting practices, budget classification systems
and other public financial management systems as prescribed by the
Accounting Standards Board;
(e) requiring any public officer employed by a county government or county
government entity to provide explanations, information and assistance in
respect to matters relating to the county government’s public finances:
Provided that a person providing the information shall not be liable if at
the time of providing the information, that person, in writing, objected
to providing such information on grounds that the information may
incriminate him or her;
(f) issuing guidelines to accounting officers for the county government
entities, or public officers employed by those entities, with respect to the
financial affairs of that Government or those entities, and monitoring
compliance with those guidelines; and

-- 78 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 79
(g) ensuring that county government entities operate a financial management
system that complies with national standards as prescribed by the
Accounting Standards Board.
(2) A County Treasury may, in writing, authorise any of its officers to carry out a
specified responsibility, or exercise a specified power, on its behalf.
(3) When carrying out a responsibility, or exercising a power, on behalf of a
County Treasury, an authorised officer shall, if requested to do so by the person
in relation to whom the responsibility or power is being carried out or exercised,
produce the officer’s authorisation for inspection and failure to comply with such
a request invalidates any subsequent action purporting to be taken under the
authority of the authorisation.
(4) An authorisation given under subsection (3) remains in force for such period
as is specified in it or, if no such period is specified, until it is revoked by the County
Treasury concerned.
(5) A County Treasury may, in writing, revoke or vary an authorisation given
under subsection (3).
Secondment of public officers by a County Treasury to the National Treasury.
106. (1) A County Treasury may, upon the request of the National Treasury,
second to the National Treasury such number of officers as may be necessary for the
National Treasury to better carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
(2) A public officer seconded to the National Treasury under subsection (1), shall
be deemed to be an officer of the National Treasury and shall be subject only to the
direction and control of the National Treasury.
County Treasury to enforce fiscal responsibility principles.
107. (1) A County Treasury shall manage its public finances in accordance with
the principles of fiscal responsibility set out in subsection (2), and shall not exceed
the limits stated in the regulations.
(2) In managing the county government’s public finances, the County Treasury
shall enforce the following fiscal responsibility principles—
(a) the county government’s recurrent expenditure shall not exceed the
county government’s total revenue;
(b) over the medium term a minimum of thirty percent of the county
government’s budget shall be allocated to the development expenditure;
(c) the country government’s expenditure on wages and benefits for its public
officers shall not exceed a percentage of the county government’s total
revenue as prescribed by the County Executive member for finance in
regulations and approved by the County Assembly;
(d) over the medium term, the government’s borrowings shall be used only for
the purpose of financing development expenditure and not for recurrent
expenditure;
(e) the county debt shall be maintained at a sustainable level as approved by
county assembly;

-- 79 of 625 --

80 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(f) the fiscal risks shall be managed prudently; and
(g) a reasonable degree of predictability with respect to the level of tax rates
and tax bases shall be maintained, taking into account any tax reforms that
may be made in the future.
(2A) Pursuant to Articles 201 and 216 of the Constitution and notwithstanding
subsection (2), the Commission on Revenue Allocation shall recommend to the
Senate the budgetary ceilings on the recurrent expenditures of each county
government.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(d), short term borrowing shall be restricted
to management of cash flows and shall not exceed five percent of the most recent
audited county government revenue.
(4) Every county government shall ensure that its level of debt at any particular
time does not exceed a percentage of its annual revenue specified in respect of each
financial year by a resolution of the county assembly.
(5) The regulations may add to the list of fiscal responsibility principles set out
in subsection (2).
[Act No. 15 of 2014, s. 12.]
County government deviation from financial objectives.
108. (1) A county government may, with the approval of its county assembly,
deviate from the financial objectives in the relevant County Fiscal Strategy Paper,
but only on a temporary basis and only if the deviation is required because of a major
natural disaster or some other significant unforeseen event.
(2) If there is a change of county government, the new county government may
deviate from the financial objectives in a County Fiscal Strategy Paper, but may not
deviate from the fiscal responsibility objectives.
(3) The County Treasury shall also provide a report to the county assembly
regarding the deviation and its implication and shall include in the report—
(a) information on the reasons and implication for the deviation;
(b) proposals to address the deviation;
(c) the time the deviation is estimated to last; and
(d) the status of development projects initiated by the county government and
if any projects have been stopped, the reasons for doing so.
(4) The County Treasury shall publish and publicise the report not later than
fifteen days after it has been submitted to the county assembly.
Responsibilities of a County Treasury with respect to County Public Funds
Establishment of a County Revenue Fund for each county government.
109. (1) There is established, for each county a County Revenue Fund in
accordance with Article 207 of the Constitution.

-- 80 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 81
(2) The County Treasury for each county government shall ensure that all money
raised or received by or on behalf of the county government is paid into the County
Revenue Fund, except money that—
(a) is excluded front payment into that Fund because of a provision of this Act
or another Act of Parliament, and is payable into another county public
fund established for a specific purpose;
(b) may, in accordance with other legislation, this Act or County legislation,
be retained by the county government entity which received it for the
purposes of defraying its expenses; or
(c) is reasonably excluded by an Act of Parliament as provided in Article 207
of the Constitution.
(3) The County Treasury shall administer the County Revenue Fund and ensure
that the county government complies with the provisions of Article 207 of the
Constitution.
(4) The County Treasury shall—
(a) arrange for the County Revenue Fund to be kept in the Central Bank of
Kenya or a bank approved by the County Executive Committee member
responsible for finance and shall be kept in an account to be known as the
“County Exchequer Account“; and
(b) ensure that all money authorised to be paid by the county government or
any of its entities for a public purpose is paid from that account without
undue delay.
(5) The County Treasury shall ensure that at no time is the County Exchequer
Account overdrawn.
(6) The County Treasury shall obtain the written approval of the Controller
of Budget before withdrawing money from the County Revenue Fund under the
authority of—
(a) an Act of the county assembly that appropriates money for a public
purpose;
(b) an Act of Parliament or county legislation that imposes a charge on that
Fund; or
(c) this Act in accordance with sections 134 and 135.
(7) The approval of the Controller of Budget to withdraw money from the
County Revenue Fund, together with written instructions from the County Treasury
requesting for the withdrawal, is sufficient authority for the approved bank where
the County Exchequer Account is held to pay amounts from this account in
accordance with the approval and the instructions.
(8) Any unutilised balances in the County Revenue Fund shall not lapse at the
end of the financial year but shall be retained for the purposes for which it was
established.
(9) Financial reports shall be submitted to the Commission on Revenue
Allocation with a copy to the Controller of Budget.

-- 81 of 625 --

82 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
County Government Executive Committee may establish county government
Emergency Fund.
110. (1) A County Executive Committee may, with the approval of the county
assembly, establish an emergency fund for the county government under the name
“……………. County Emergency Fund” and the fund shall consist of money from time
to time appropriated by the county assembly to the Fund by an appropriation law.
(2) The purpose of an Emergency Fund is to enable payments to be made in
respect of a county when an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which
there is no specific legislative authority arises.
County Executive Committee member for finance to administer the Emergency
Fund.
111. (1) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall administer
the county government Emergency Fund for the county government in accordance
with a framework and criteria approved by the county assembly.
(2) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall establish and
maintain a separate account into which all money appropriated to the Emergency
Fund shall be paid.
Power of County Executive Committee member to make payments from
Emergency Fund.
112. (1) Subject to section 113, the County Executive Committee member for
Finance may make payments from the county government’s Emergency Fund only if
he or she is satisfied that there is an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for
which there is no legislative authority and shall be in accordance with operational
guidelines made under regulations approved by Parliament and the law relating to
disaster management.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), there is an urgent and unforeseen event
for expenditure if the County Executive Committee member for finance, guided by
regulations and relevant laws, establishes that—
(a) payment not budgeted for cannot be delayed until a later financial year
without harming the general public interest;
(b) payment is meant to alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering
which may be caused directly by the event; and
(c) the damage caused by the event is on a small scale and limited to the
county.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), the unforeseen event is one which—
(a) threatens damage to human life or welfare; or
(b) threatens damage to the environment.
Limitation on power of County Executive Committee member for finance to
make payments from Emergency Fund.
113. The County Executive Committee member for finance may not, during
a financial year, make a payment from the Emergency Fund under section 112

-- 82 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 83
exceeding two per cent of the total county government revenue as shown in that
county government’s audited financial statements for the previous financial year,
except for the first year.
County Executive Committee member for finance to seek approval for
payments from Emergency Fund.
114. (1) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall seek
approval of the county assembly within two months after payment is made from the
Emergency Fund.
(2) If the county assembly is not sitting during the period referred to in
subsection (1), or soon thereafter, the County Executive Committee member for
finance shall seek the approval for the payment within fourteen days after the County
Assembly next sits.
(3) As soon as practicable after the county assembly has approved the payment,
the County Executive Committee member for finance shall cause a draft of the
appropriation Bill to be introduced in the county assembly for the appropriation of
the money paid and for the replenishment of the county government’s Emergency
Fund to the extent of the amount of the payment.
County Treasury to submit a report to Auditor-General in respect to
Emergency Fund.
115. (1) Where an Emergency Fund has been established for a county
government in accordance with section 110, the County Treasury shall, not later than
three months after the end of each financial year, prepare and submit to the Auditor-
General, financial statements in respect of the Emergency Fund for that year.
(2) The County Treasury shall include in the financial statements made under
subsection (1)—
(a) the date and amount of each payment made from that Fund;
(b) the person to whom the payment was made;
(c) the purpose for which the payment was made;
(d) whether the person to whom the payment was made has spent the money
for that purpose, and a statement made to that effect;
(e) if the person to whom the payment has been made has not yet spent the
money for that purpose, a statement specifying the reasons for not having
done so; and
(f) a statement indicating how the payment conforms to section 112 of this
Act.
Power to establish other county public funds.
116. (1) A County Executive Committee member for finance may establish other
public funds with the approval of the County Executive Committee and the county
assembly.
(2) For every county public fund established, the County Executive Committee
member for finance shall designate a person responsible for administering that fund.

-- 83 of 625 --

84 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(3) The administrator of a county public fund shall ensure that the earnings of, or
accruals to a county public fund are retained in the fund, unless the County Executive
Committee member for finance directs otherwise.
(4) The administrator of a county public fund shall ensure that money held in the
fund, including any earnings or accruals referred to in subsection (3) is spent only
for the purposes for which the fund is established.
(5) The County Executive Committee member for finance may wind up a county
public fund with the approval of the county assembly.
(6) On the winding up of a county public fund—
(a) the administrator of the fund shall pay any amount remaining in the fund
into the County Exchequer Account; and
(b) the County Executive Committee member for finance shall, with the
approval of the county assembly, pay any deficit in the fund from the
County Exchequer Account.
(7) The administrator of a county public fund shall—
(a) prepare accounts for the fund for each financial year;
(b) not later than three months after the end of each financial year, submit
financial statements relating to those accounts to the Auditor-General;
and
(c) present the financial statements to the county assembly.
(8) The administrator of a county public fund shall ensure that the accounts for
the fund and the annual financial statements relating to those accounts comply with
the accounting standards prescribed and published by the Accounting Standards
Board from time to time.
(9) Regulations may provide for the establishment, management, operation or
winding-up of county public funds under this section.
(10) This section does not apply to the County Revenue Fund established under
section 109 of this Act.
(11) The funds and usage of money through the funds shall be published and
publicised.
(12) In this section—
“administrator”, in relation to a county public fund, means a person designated
by the County Executive Committee member for finance under subsection (2) to
administer the fund;
“County public fund” means a public fund established under subsection (1).
Responsibilities of county government with respect to the County Budget process
County Treasury to prepare County Fiscal Strategy Paper.
117. (1) The County Treasury shall prepare and submit to the County Executive
Committee the County Fiscal Strategy Paper for approval and the County Treasury

-- 84 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 85
shall submit the approved Fiscal Strategy Paper to the county assembly, by the 28th
February of each year.
(2) The County Treasury shall align its County Fiscal Strategy Paper with the
national objectives in the Budget Policy Statement.
(3) In preparing the County Fiscal Strategy Paper, the County Treasury shall
specify the broad strategic priorities and policy goals that will guide the county
government in preparing its budget for the coming financial year and over the
medium term.
(4) The County Treasury shall include in its County Fiscal Strategy Paper the
financial outlook with respect to county government revenues, expenditures and
borrowing for the coming financial year and over the medium term.
(5) In preparing the County Fiscal Strategy Paper, the County Treasury shall seek
and take into account the views of—
(a) the Commission on Revenue Allocation;
(b) the public;
(c) any interested persons or groups; and
(d) any other forum that is established by legislation.
(6) Not later than fourteen days after submitting the County Fiscal Strategy Paper
to the county assembly, the county assembly shall consider and may adopt it with
or without amendments.
(7) The County Treasury shall consider any recommendations made by the
county assembly when finalising the budget proposal for the Financial year
concerned.
(8) The County Treasury shall publish and publicise the County Fiscal Strategy
Paper within seven days after it has been submitted to the county assembly.
County Treasury to prepare a County Budget Review and Outlook Paper.
118. (1) A County Treasury shall—
(a) prepare a County Budget Review and Outlook Paper in respect of the
county for each financial year; and
(b) submit the paper to the County Executive Committee by the 30th
September of that year.
(2) In preparing its county Budget Review and Outlook Paper, the County
Treasury shall specify—
(a) the details of the actual fiscal performance in the previous year compared
to the budget appropriation for that year;
(b) the updated economic and financial forecasts with sufficient information
to show changes from the forecasts in the most recent County Fiscal
Strategy Paper;

-- 85 of 625 --

86 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(c) information on—
(i) any changes in the forecasts compared with the County Fiscal
Strategy Paper; or
(ii) how actual financial performance for the previous financial year may
have affected compliance with the fiscal responsibility principles, or
the financial objectives in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper for that
financial year; and
(d) reasons for any deviation from the financial objectives in the County Fiscal
Strategy Paper together with proposals to address the deviation and the
time estimated for doing so.
(3) The County Executive Committee shall consider the County Budget Review
and Outlook Paper with a view to approving it, with or without amendments, within
fourteen days after its submission.
(4) Not later than seven days after the County Budget Review and Outlook Paper
is approved by the County Executive Committee, the County Treasury shall—
(a) arrange for the Paper to be laid before the County Assembly; and
(b) as soon as practicable after having done so, publish and publicise the
Paper.
Other responsibilities of County Treasury
Banking arrangements for county government and its entities.
119. (1) The County Treasury is responsible for authorising the opening,
operating and closing of bank accounts for the county government and its entities,
except as otherwise provided by other legislation and in accordance with regulations
made under this Act.
(2) As soon as practicable, each County Treasury shall establish a Treasury Single
Account at the Central Bank of Kenya or a bank approved by the County Treasury
through which payments of money to and by the various county government entities
are to be made.
(3) The Treasury Single Account shall not be operated in a manner that prejudices
any entity to which funds have been disbursed.
(4) An accounting officer for a county government entity shall not cause a bank
account of the entity to be overdrawn beyond the limit authorised by the County
Treasury or a Board of a county government entity, if any.
(5) A County Treasury shall keep complete and current records of all bank
accounts for which it is responsible under the Constitution, this Act or any other
legislation.
(6) Subject to subsection (3), an accounting officer who authorises the bank
account of a county government entity to be overdrawn is liable for the full cost of
the overdrawn amount, in addition to any other disciplinary measures that—
(a) the County Executive Committee member for finance may impose under
section 156; or

-- 86 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 87
(b) any other relevant authority may impose under the provisions of any other
legislation.
Management of cash at the county government level.
120. (1) A County Treasury shall manage its cash within a framework established
by the county assembly and by regulations.
(2) Every county government entity shall submit an annual cash flow plan and
forecasts to the County Treasury in a form and manner directed by County Treasury,
and shall send a copy to the Controller of Budget.
(3) The County Treasury may invest subject to any regulations that may be
prescribed, any money kept in a bank account of the county government.
(4) Except as otherwise provided by other legislation, the following are payable
into the County Exchequer Account—
(a) all interest received from investments made under subsection (3);
(b) all money received from the redemption or maturity of the investments,
and from the sale or conversion of securities relating to the investments.
(5) The County Treasury may incur costs, charges and expenses in connection
with negotiating, placing, managing, servicing, or converting any investment
entered into under subsection (3).
(6) Any costs, charges or expenses incurred under subsection (5) are payable from
the County Exchequer Account.
Procurement for county government entities.
121. For the purposes of this Act, all procurement of goods and services and
disposal of assets, required for the purposes of the county government or a county
government entity are to be carried out in accordance with Article 227 of the
Constitution and the Public Procurement and Disposal Act (Cap. 412C).
County Treasury to maintain record of county government loans.
122. (1) The County Treasury shall maintain a record of all loans made to the
county government and make the record available to the county assembly within
seven days of request.
(2) The County Treasury shall include in the record under subsection (1), the
following information—
(a) the principal of the loan and the terms and conditions of the loan,
including interest and other charges payable and the terms of repayment;
(b) the amount of the loan advanced at any particular time;
(c) the principal amount, interest and other charges paid at any particular
time; and
(d) the balance of principal, interest and other charges outstanding at any
particular time.

-- 87 of 625 --

88 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(3) The county treasury shall maintain the following additional information with
respect to every such loan—
(a) the names of the parties to the loan;
(b) the amount of the loan and the currency in which it is expressed and in
which it is repayable;
(c) the terms and conditions of the loan, including interest and other charges
payable and the terms of repayment;
(d) the amount of the loan advanced at the time the report under subsection
(3) is submitted;
(e) the purpose for which the loan was used and the perceived benefits of the
loan; and
(f) any other information that the county assembly requests.
(4) The County Treasury shall submit both quarterly and annual reports of all
loans made to the county government to the county assembly.
County Treasury to submit county government debt management strategy to
county assembly.
123. (1) On or before the 28th February in each year, the County Treasury
shall submit to the county assembly a statement setting out the debt management
strategy of the county government over the medium term with regard to its actual
liability and potential liability in respect of loans and its plans for dealing with those
liabilities.
(2) The County Treasury shall include the following information in the
statement—
(a) the total stock of debt as at the date of the statement;
(b) the sources of loans made to the county government;
(c) the principal risks associated with those loans;
(d) the assumptions underlying the debt management strategy; and
(e) an analysis of the sustainability of the amount of debt, both actual and
potential.
(3) As soon as practicable after the statement has been submitted to the county
assembly under this section, the County Executive Committee member for finance
shall publish and publicise the statement and submit a copy to the Commission on
Revenue Allocation and the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council.
County Treasury to provide county assembly with additional reports when
required.
124. On being requested to do so by the county assembly, the County Treasury
shall prepare and submit to the county assembly a report on any matter relating to
its responsibilities within fourteen days of the request.

-- 88 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 89
County government budget process
Stages in county government budget process.
125. (1) The budget process for county governments in any financial year shall
consist of the following stages—
(a) integrated development planning process which shall include both long
term and medium term planning;
(b) planning and establishing financial and economic priorities for the county
over the medium term;
(c) making an overall estimation of the county government’s revenues and
expenditures;
(d) adoption of County Fiscal Strategy Paper;
(e) preparing budget estimates for the county government and submitting
estimates to the count) assembly;
(f) approving of the estimates by the county assembly;
(g) enacting an appropriation law and any other laws required to implement
the county government’s budget;
(h) implementing the county government’s budget; and
(i) accounting for, and evaluating, the county government’s budgeted
revenues and expenditures.
(2) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall ensure that there
is public participation in the budget process.
County government to prepare development plan.
126. (1) Every county government shall prepare a development plan in
accordance with Article 220(2) of the Constitution, that includes—
(a) strategic priorities for the medium term that reflect the county
government’s priorities and plans;
(b) a description of how the county government is responding to changes in
the financial and economic environment;
(c) programmes to be delivered with details for each programme of—
(i) the strategic priorities to which the programme will contribute;
(ii) the services or goods to be provided;
(iii) measurable indicators of performance where feasible; and
(iv) the budget allocated to the programme;
(d) payments to be made on behalf of the county government, including
details of any grants, benefits and subsidies that are to be paid;
(e) a description of significant capital developments;

-- 89 of 625 --

90 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(f) a detailed description of proposals with respect to the development of
physical, intellectual, human and other resources of the county, including
measurable indicators where those are feasible;
(g) a summary budget in the format required by regulations; and
(h) such other matters as may be required by the Constitution or this Act.
(2) The County Executive Committee member responsible for planning shall
prepare the development plan in accordance with the format prescribed by
regulations.
(3) The County Executive Committee member responsible for planning shall, not
later than the 1st September in each year, submit the development plan to the county
assembly for its approval, and send a copy to the Commission on Revenue Allocation
and the National Treasury.
(4) The County Executive Committee member responsible for planning shall
publish and publicise the annual development plan within seven days after its
submission to the county assembly.
County government to prepare cash flow projections.
127. (1) Not later than the 15th June of each financial year, every county
government shall prepare an annual cash flow projection for the county for the next
financial year, and submit the cash flow projection to the Controller of Budget with
copies to the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council and the National
Treasury.
(2) Regulations shall prescribe the format and content of the annual cash flow
projections.
County Executive Committee member for finance to manage budget process
at county government level.
128. (1) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall manage the
budget process for the county.
(2) Not later than the 30th August in each year, the County Executive Committee
member for finance shall issue a circular setting out guidelines to be followed by all
of the county government’s entities in the budget process.
(3) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall include in the
circular—
(a) a schedule for preparation of the budget, specifying the key dates by which
the various processes are to be completed;
(b) the methodology for the review and projection of revenues and
expenditures;
(c) key policy areas and issues to be taken into consideration when preparing
the budget;
(d) the procedures to be followed by members of the public who wish to
participate in the budget process;

-- 90 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 91
(e) the format in which information and documents relating to the budget are
to be submitted;
(f) the information to be in conformity with standard budget classification
systems as prescribed by regulations; and
(g) any other information relevant to the budget process.
(4) A county government entity shall comply with the guidelines and, in
particular, shall adhere to the key dates specified in the schedule referred to in
subsection (3)(a).
County Executive Committee member to submit budget estimates and other
documents to County Executive Committee for approval.
129. (1) A County Executive Committee member for finance shall submit to the
County Executive Committee for its approval—
(a) the budget estimates and other documents supporting the budget of the
county government, excluding the county assembly; and
(b) the draft Bills at county level required to implement the county
government budget, in sufficient time to meet the deadlines prescribed by
this section.
(2) Following approval by the County Executive Committee, the County
Executive Committee member for finance shall—
(a) submit to the county assembly the budget estimates, supporting
documents, and any other Bills required to implement the budget, except
the Finance Bill, by the 30th April in that year; and
(b) ensure that the estimates submitted in subsection (a) are in accordance
with the resolutions adopted by county assembly on the County Fiscal
Strategy Paper.
(3) Each county assembly clerk shall prepare and submit to the county assembly
the budget estimates for the county assembly and a copy shall be submitted to the
County Executive Committee member for finance.
(4) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall prepare and
present his or her comments on the budget estimates presented by the county
assembly clerk.
(5) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall ensure that the
budget process is conducted in a manner and within a timeframe sufficient to permit
the participants in the process to meet the requirements of the Constitution and
this Act.
(6) As soon as is practicable after the budget estimates and other documents have
been submitted to the County Assembly under this section, the County Executive
Committee member for finance shall publish and publicise the documents.
(7) Upon approval of the budget estimates by the county assembly, the County
Executive Committee member for finance shall prepare and submit a County
Appropriation Bill to the county assembly of the approved estimates.

-- 91 of 625 --

92 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
County Executive Committee member for finance to submit budget documents
to county assembly.
130. (1) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall submit to the
county assembly the following documents in respect of the budget for every financial
year—
(a) a budget summary that includes—
(i) a summary of budget policies including revenue, expenditure, debt
and deficit financing; and
(ii) an explanation of how the budget relates to the fiscal responsibility
principles and the financial objectives;
(iii) a memorandum by the County Executive Committee member for
finance explaining how the resolutions adopted by the county
assembly on the budget estimates have been taken into account;
(b) budget estimates that include—
(i) a list of all county government entities that are to receive funds
appropriated from the budget of the county government;
(ii) estimates of revenue projected from the Equalisation Fund over the
medium term;
(iii) all revenue allocations from the national government over the
medium term, including conditional and unconditional grants;
(iv) all other estimated revenue by broad economic classification;
(v) all estimated expenditure, by Vote, and by programme, clearly
identifying both recurrent and development expenditures;
(vi) information regarding loans made to the county government,
including an estimate of principal, interest and other charges to be
paid by that county government in the financial year in respect of
those loans;
(c) information relating to any payments and liabilities to be made or incurred
by the county government for which an appropriation is not included in an
Appropriation Act, together with the constitutional or national legislative
authority for any such payments or liabilities; and
(d) a statement by the County Executive Committee member for finance
specifying the measures taken by the county government to implement
any recommendations made by the county assembly with respect to the
budget for the previous financial year.
(2) In preparing the annual Appropriation Bill to put before the County
Assembly, the County Executive Committee member for finance shall ensure that
the expenditure appropriations in the Bill are in a form that-
(a) is accurate, precise, informative and pertinent to budget issues; and
(b) clearly identities the appropriations by Vote and programme.
(3) In preparing the annual appropriation Bill under subsection (2), the county
executive committee member responsible for finance shall include, in the allocation

-- 92 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 93
to the county assembly any unspent funds that had been appropriated to the county
assembly in the immediate preceding financial year.
(4) Where an Appropriation Bill is passed before the beginning of the financial
year to which it relates and does not contain unspent funds allocated to the
county assembly in the immediate preceding financial year, the county executive
committee member for finance shall prepare and submit to the county assembly a
Supplementary Appropriation Bill allocating the unspent funds.
(5) A Bill prepared under subsection (4) shall be introduced in the county
assembly within two months of the commencement of the financial year.
(6) Failure by the county executive committee member for finance to prepare
a Supplementary Appropriation Bill under subsection (4) shall constitute an
additional indicator of a serious or persistent material breach under section 94.
[Act No. 9 of 2021, s. 11.]
County Assembly to consider budget estimates.
131. (1) The county assembly shall consider the county government budget
estimates with a view to approving them, with or without amendments, in time for
the relevant appropriation law and any other laws required to implement the budget
to be passed by the 30th June in each year.
(2) Before the county assembly considers the estimates of revenue and
expenditure, the relevant committee of the county assembly shall discuss and review
the estimates and make recommendations to the county assembly, and in finalising
the recommendations to county assembly, the committee shall take into account the
views of the County Executive Committee member for finance and the public on the
proposed recommendations.
(3) An amendment to the budget estimates may be made by the county assembly
only if it is in accordance with the resolutions adopted regarding the County Fiscal
Strategy Paper and if—
(a) any increase in expenditure in a proposed appropriation, is balanced by a
reduction in expenditure in another proposed appropriation; and
(b) any proposed reduction in expenditure is used to reduce the deficit.
(4) Where a Bill originating from a member of a county assembly proposes
amendments after the passing of budget estimates and the Appropriations Bill by
the county assembly, the county assembly may proceed in accordance with the
resolutions adopted regarding the County Fiscal Strategy Paper and ensure—
(a) an increase in expenditure in a proposed appropriation is balanced by a
reduction in expenditure in another proposed appropriation; or
(b) a proposed reduction in expenditure is used to reduce the deficit.
(5) Not later than twenty-one days after the county assembly has approved the
budget estimates, the County Treasury shall consolidate the estimates and publish
and publicise them.
(6) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall take all
reasonably practicable steps to ensure that the approved budget estimates are

-- 93 of 625 --

94 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
prepared and published in a form that is clear and easily understood by, and readily
accessible to, members of the public.
Submission and consideration of the revenue raising measures in the county
assembly.
132. (1) Each financial year, the County Executive member for finance shall,
with the approval of the County Executive Committee, make a pronouncement of
the revenue raising measures for the county government.
(2) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall, on the same date
that the revenue raising measures are pronounced, submit to the county assembly
the County Finance Bill, setting out the revenue raising measures for the county
government, together with a policy statement expounding on those measures.
(3) Any recommendations made by the relevant committee or adopted by the
county assembly on revenue matters shall—
(a) ensure that the total amount of revenue raised is consistent with the
approved fiscal framework and the County Allocation of Revenue Act;
(b) take into account the principles of equity, certainty and ease of collection;
(c) consider the impact of the proposed changes on the composition of tax
revenue with reference to direct and indirect taxes;
(d) consider domestic, regional and international tax trends;
(e) consider the impact on development, investment, employment and
economic growth; and
(f) take into account the taxation and other tariff agreements and obligations
that Kenya has ratified, including taxation and tariff agreements under the
East African Community Treaty.
(4) The recommendation of the County Executive Committee member for finance
shall be included in a report and tabled in the county assembly.
Approval of the Finance Bill.
133. Not later than ninety days after passing the Appropriation Bill, the county
assembly shall consider and approve the Finance Bill with or without amendments.
Action to be taken in case of delay in enacting County Appropriation Bill.
134. (1) Subject to subsection (2), if the County Appropriation Bill for a financial
year has not been assented to, or is not likely to be assented to by the beginning of
that financial year, a county assembly may authorise the withdrawal of money from
the County Revenue Fund.
(2) Money withdrawn under subsection (1)—
(a) may be used only for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to
carry on the services of the county government during the financial year
concerned until such time as the relevant appropriation law is passed; and
(b) may not exceed, in total, one-half of the amount included in the estimates
of expenditure submitted to the county assembly for that year.

-- 94 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 95
(3) The Speaker of the county assembly shall, within seven days, communicate
the authorisation in subsection (1) to the County Executive Committee member for
finance.
(4) The money withdrawn under subsection (1) shall be included in the
appropriation law, under separate Votes, for the services for which it is withdrawn.
County government to submit to county assembly supplementary budget in
certain circumstances.
135. (1) A county government may spend money that has not been appropriated
if the amount appropriated for any purpose under the County Appropriation Act is
insufficient or a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount
has been appropriated by that Act, or money has been withdrawn from the county
government Emergency Fund.
(2) A county government shall submit a supplementary budget in support of the
additional expenditure for authority for spending under subsection (1).
(3) In complying with subsection (2), a county government shall describe how
the additional expenditure relates to the fiscal responsibility principles and financial
objectives.
(4) Except as provided by subsection (5), the approval of the county assembly for
any spending under this section shall be sought within two months after the first
withdrawal of the money.
(5) If the county assembly is not sitting during the time contemplated in
subsection (4), or is sitting but adjourns before approval has been sought, approval
shall be sought within fourteen days after it next sits.
(6) When the county assembly has approved spending under subsection (2), a
supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced for the appropriation of the
money spent.
(7) In any financial year, the county government may not spend under this
section more than ten percent of the amount appropriated by the county assembly
for that year unless that county assembly has, in special circumstances, approved a
higher percentage.
Appropriation of money for county government purpose to lapse if unspent.
136. (1) Subject to any other legislation, an appropriation that has not
been spent at the end of the financial year for which it was appropriated lapses
immediately at the end of that financial year.
(2) If, at the end of a financial year, a county government entity is holding
appropriated money that was withdrawn from the County Exchequer Account but
has not been spent, it shall repay the unspent money to the County Exchequer
Account and prepare a refund statement which shall be forwarded to the Controller
of Budget.

-- 95 of 625 --

96 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Establishment of Forum for consultation by county governments
Establishment of County Budget and Economic Forum for county budget
consultation process.
137. (1) As soon as practicable after the commencement of this Act, a county
government shall establish a forum to be known as the (Name of the County) County
Budget and Economic Forum.
(2) The County Budget and Economic Forum shall consist of—
(a) the Governor of the county who shall be the chairperson;
(b) other members of the county executive committee;
(c) a number of representatives, not being county public officers, equal to the
number of executive committee members appointed by the Governor from
persons nominated by organisations representing professionals, business,
labour issues, women, persons with disabilities, the elderly and faith-
based groups at the county level.
(3) The purpose of the Forum is to provide a means for consultation by the county
government on—
(a) preparation of county plans, the County Fiscal Strategy Paper and the
Budget Review and Outlook Paper for the county; and
(b) matters relating to budgeting, the economy and financial management at
the county level.
(4) In addition to the above, consultations shall be in accordance with the
consultation process provided in the law relating to county governments.
Responsibilities of County Executive Committee Member for finance
and functions of the county government in respect to public finances
Conditions for receiving grants and donations by county government or its
entities or third parties.
138. (1) In this section and section 139—
(a) “donation” means a gift or a contribution;
(b) “grant” means the provision of financial or other assistance by a
development partner which is not repayable and—
(i) where public money is paid to or used by a grant recipient;
(ii) which is intended to finance the development of projects or delivery
of services or otherwise assist the grant recipient to achieve
goals that are consistent with the policy objectives of the county
government; and
(iii) where the grant recipient is required to act in accordance with any
terms or conditions specified in a grant agreement;
(c) “grant recipient” means the county government or a county government
entity authorised to control or spend money under this Act or an

-- 96 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 97
incorporated or unincorporated body not otherwise authorised to control
or spend money under this Act;
(d) “intended beneficiaries” means the people of the county whom the
projects or public services financed by a grant are intended to benefit;
(e) “third party” means any other person other than a public officer.
(2) Subsections (3) to (9) apply to the county government and county government
entities.
(3) A county government or county government entity may receive a grant or
donation from a development partner with the approval of the County Executive
Committee member for finance and only as provided by this section.
(4) As soon as practicable after receiving the grant or donation, the recipient
shall notify the County Executive Committee member for finance and the Cabinet
Secretary of the receipt.
(5) Funds received in the form of grants or donations shall only be spent in
accordance with Article 224 of the Constitution.
(6) If a project that is being financed by a grant or donation from a development
partner requires county government funding, the project may only be started when—
(a) the required funding has been appropriated in accordance with this Act or
is otherwise authorised by legislation; or
(b) the County Executive Committee member for finance has given a written
authorisation for the project to begin.
(7) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall inform the county
assembly of the authorisation given under subsection (6)(b).
(8) The recipient of a grant or donation from a development partner shall record
the amount or value of the grant or donation in its books of accounts.
(9) Subject to audit in terms of Article 229(4) of the Constitution, the recipient
of a grant or donation from a development partner shall administer and account for
the grant or donation by using government—
(a) financial and accounting practices laid down under an Act of Parliament,
rules and regulations; and
(b) administrative, accounting and auditing procedures, including financial
accounting rules and procedures for accounting for the receipt or
expenditure of money specified or referred to, in any agreement between
the recipient and the development partner.
Regulations on grant administration.
139. (1) Regulations approved by the county assembly shall provide for the
administration, control and management of grants, including—
(a) procedures for the allocation and disbursement of grants, including
requiring the publication of transparent criteria for the allocation of
grants;

-- 97 of 625 --

98 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) requirements for grant agreements binding on grant recipients that specify
the terms and conditions to which the grant is subject;
(c) procedures for the budgeting, financial management, accounting and
reporting of grants by grants recipients;
(d) procedures under which a third party may be authorised to receive, control
or pay public money as a grant; and
(e) measures to ensure that any third party that is authorised to receive,
control or pay public money as a grant, or is responsible for any other
aspect of administration of a grant, is subject to the same obligations as a
public officer under this Act.
(2) Regulations under subsection (1) shall include measures to ensure public
disclosure, accountability and participation in relation to grants including—
(a) timely public disclosure to intended beneficiaries of the allocation and
disbursement of grants to grant recipients;
(b) timely public disclosure by grant recipients to intended beneficiaries of
expenditure and performance achieved in relation to the grant;
(c) measures that allow the intended beneficiaries to participate in the design
and management of the projects or public services financed by the grant;
(d) measures that allow the intended beneficiaries to report instances of non-
compliance with the regulations or grant agreement;
(e) sanctions that may be imposed on grant recipients in response to instances
of non-compliance by one or more grant recipients; and
(f) the obligations of any public officer or third party authorized to receive,
control or pay public money as grants.
(3) A third party shall not receive, have custody of, or pay public money otherwise
than in accordance with an authorisation given in accordance with regulations made
under subsection (1).
(4) A third party who contravenes subsection (3) commits an offence and on
conviction is liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding two years or to a fine
not exceeding one million shillings, or to both and shall make good any loss arising
from the use of public funds contrary to the law.
Authority for borrowing by county governments.
140. (1) A County Executive Committee member for finance may, on behalf of
the county government, raise a loan for that Government’s purposes, only if the loan
and the terms and conditions for the loan are set out in writing and are in accordance
with—
(a) Article 212 of the Constitution;
(b) sections 58 and 142 of this Act;
(c) the fiscal responsibility principles and the financial objectives of the
county government set out in its most recent County Fiscal Strategy Paper;
and

-- 98 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 99
(d) the debt management strategy of the county government over the medium
term.
(2) A loan may be raised either within Kenya or outside Kenya.
Obligations and restrictions with respect to county government borrowing.
141. (1) In borrowing money, a county government shall ensure that its financing
needs and payment obligations are met at the lowest possible cost in the market that
is consistent with a prudent degree of risk, while ensuring that the overall level of
public debt is sustainable.
(2) A county government may borrow money only in accordance with this Act or
any other legislation and shall not exceed the limit set by the county assembly.
(3) A county government may borrow money in accordance with section 58, and
only for purposes that are prescribed by regulations made under this subsection.
(4) A public debt incurred by a county government is a charge on the
County Revenue Fund, unless the County Executive Committee member for finance
determines that all or part of the public debt that would otherwise be a charge on that
Fund shall be a charge on another public fund established by that county government
or any of its entities.
(5) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall pay the proceeds
of any loan raised under this Act into the County Revenue Fund or into any other
public fund established by the county government or as the County Executive
Committee member for finance may determine.
(6) A County Executive Committee member for finance may establish such
sinking fund or funds for the redemption of loans raised under this Act for the
purposes of the county government or any of its entities as the County Executive
Committee member for finance considers necessary.
(7) A County Executive Committee member for finance may in accordance with
national legislation on public procurement and disposal of assets—
(a) appoint advisers, agents and underwriters for the purposes of raising
loans; and
(b) enter into agreements with those advisers, agents and underwriters as to
the role to be undertaken by them and the remuneration to be paid to them.
(8) Any expenses incurred in connection with borrowing by a county government
shall be a charge—
(a) on the County Revenue Fund; or
(b) on such other county public fund established by the county government or
any of its entities as the County Executive Committee member for finance
may determine in accordance with regulations approved by the county
assembly.
(9) The costs, interests and principal payments made by the national government
on behalf of the county concerning loans to the county government shall, together
with the principal amount, be reimbursed to the national government by the county
government.

-- 99 of 625 --

100 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Borrowing by county government entities.
142. (1) The County Assembly may authorise short term borrowing by county
government entities for cash management purposes only.
(2) Any borrowing under subsection (1) may not exceed five percent of the most
recent audited revenues of the entity.
(3) A county government entity that has any such borrowing shall ensure that
the money borrowed is repaid within a year from the date on which it was borrowed.
Persons who are authorised to execute loan documents at county government
level.
143. (1) The County Executive Committee member for finance or any person
designated by the County Executive Committee member for finance in writing is
authorised to execute loan documents for borrowing by the county government.
(2) Despite the provisions of subsection (1), the following persons are authorised
to execute loan documents for borrowing by a county government entity—
(a) the accounting officer responsible for the entity; and
(b) any other specified office holder authorised by legislation to execute such
documents on behalf of an entity.
County government may issue securities only if authorised by this Act.
144. (1) The county government may issue securities, whether for money that
it has borrowed or for any other purpose, only in one or more series and only in
accordance with this Act and regulations.
(2) The County Executive Committee member for finance may issue securities on
behalf of the county government, for money borrowed by the county government in
accordance with the criteria prescribed by regulations made for the purpose of this
subsection.
(3) Subject to the provisions of section 141 of this Act, the authority of the County
Executive Committee member for finance to borrow money includes the authority
to borrow money by issuing county government securities in accordance with the
regulations.
(4) Any county government securities issued by the County Executive Member
for finance under this section shall be within the borrowing limits set out by the
county assembly under section 141(2) of this Act.
(5) A county government securities—
(a) may be issued in one or more series; and
(b) may be issued in accordance with loan agreements entered into
in accordance with regulations developed by the County Executive
Committee member for finance and approved by the County Assembly.
(6) An agreement to obtain a loan by a county government entity made under
subsection (5), may be amended from time to time and where the amendment results
in further indebtedness or prejudice to the entity that borrowed, the amendment
shall be approved by the county assembly.

-- 100 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 101
(7) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall ensure that every
county government security issued under this section is given in the name of that
County.
(8) A county government security may be executed on behalf of the county
government only by—
(a) the County Executive Committee member for finance;
(b) a delegate appointed by the County Executive Committee member for
finance; or
(c) a borrowing agent appointed for that purpose under this Act.
(9) For the purposes of subsection (8), it shall be sufficient if the signature of a
person who is required to execute a county government security under this section
is reproduced on the security.
(10) At the request of the holder of a county government security, the County
Executive Committee member for finance—
(a) may authorise the principal, or any interest payable in respect of the
principal, to be paid at a place in Kenya or elsewhere different from the
place otherwise provided; and
(b) may revoke such an authorisation and substitute thereof.
(11) A person to whom an authorisation is given under subsection (10) shall
comply with the authorisation.
(12) The County Executive Committee member for finance may authorise
in writing the issue of a duplicate county government security to replace a
county Government security that is lost, damaged, or destroyed, but only if the
County Executive Committee member for finance is satisfied that loss, damage or
destruction has occurred.
(13) Subject to this Act or any other legislation, secondary trading of county
government securities may be carried out only in such manner as may be prescribed
by regulations made for the purposes of this subsection and in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
(14) In this section, “secondary trading” means any activity leading to a change
in the ownership of a county government security before its redemption date.
(15) Nothing provided under this section shall prevent county government
securities to be issued and exist in electronic form as a debt entry.
(16) If the proceeds of a county government security have not been collected by,
or cannot be paid to, the holder of the security because the whereabouts of the holder
or, if the holder has died, the whereabouts of the holder’s personal representatives,
are unknown, the County Executive Committee member for finance shall arrange for
the County Treasury to credit the amount of money due to the holder to an interest
free account for the holder’s benefit.
(17) If, after six years from the redemption date of a county government security,
the proceeds of the security have not been collected by, or paid to, the holder or
the holder’s personal representatives, the County Executive Committee member for

-- 101 of 625 --

102 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
finance shall return the uncollected amount to the County Exchequer Account to
form part of the County Revenue Fund in accordance with regulations.
(18) The right of any person who has a legitimate claim to the proceeds of a
security is not affected by the payment of the proceeds into the County Revenue
Fund.
(19) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall publish and
publicise annually all payments made in terms of subsection (17).
(20) Duty is not chargeable under the Stamp Duty Act (Cap. 480) for the issue of
a county government security.
County government authorised to lend money.
145. (1) A county government entity may lend money in accordance with this
Act or any county legislation.
(2) The County Executive Committee member for finance may, in relation to any
money lent by the county government under this section—
(a) accept, in consultation with the Central Bank of Kenya, all money payable
under the loan in any currency the County Executive Committee member
for finance considers appropriate; and
(b) agree at any time to the variation of any security given in respect of the
loan.
(3) Money loaned under this section is payable only—
(a) from an appropriation for development expenditures; or
(b) from some other authority approved by the county assembly for the
purpose for which the loan is made.
(4) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall ensure that a
security given in respect of a loan under this section is given in the name of the
county government.
(5) The County Executive Committee member for finance may, on behalf of the
county government, carry out any of the responsibilities, and exercise any of the
powers, of the county government with respect to securing a loan granted by that
county government.
County government joint infrastructure investment.
146. (1) Regulations approved by Parliament shall prescribe financial relations
with respect to joint infrastructure investments undertaken by counties and any
joint infrastructure investments undertaken by counties shall be done in terms of
those regulations.
(2) The Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council may agree on
regulations with guidelines for county government joint infrastructure investments.

-- 102 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 103
Responsibilities of an accounting officer of a
county assembly in management of public finances
Role of accounting officers in management of public finances.
147.
Subject to the Constitution, the accounting officer of a county assembly shall
monitor, evaluate and oversee the management of their public finances, including—
(a) promoting and enforcing transparency, effective management and
accountability with regard to the use of their finances;
(b) ensuring that accounting standards are applied;
(c) implementing financial policies in relation to their finances;
(d) ensuring proper management and control of, and accounting for, their
finances in order to promote the efficient and effective use of budgetary
resources;
(e) preparing annual estimates of expenditures;
(f) acting as custodian of the entity’s assets except as may be provided by other
legislation or the Constitution;
(g) monitoring the management of their finances and their financial
performance;
(h) reporting regularly to the county assembly on the implementation of their
budget; and
(i) take such other action, not inconsistent with the Constitution, as will further
the implementation of this Act.
Responsibilities of accounting officers of county
governments and county government entities
Designation of accounting officers for county government entities by the
County Executive Committee Member for finance.
148. (1) A County Executive Committee member for finance shall, except as
otherwise provided by law, in writing designate accounting officers to be responsible
for managing the finances of the county government entities as is specified in the
designation.
(2) Except as otherwise stated in other legislation, the person responsible for
the administration of a county government entity, shall be the accounting officer
responsible for managing the finances of that entity.
(3) A County Executive Committee member for finance shall ensure that each
county government entity has an accounting officer in accordance with Article 226
of the Constitution.
(4) The Clerk to the county assembly shall be the accounting officer of the county
assembly.

-- 103 of 625 --

104 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(5) A county government may, in order to promote efficient use of the county
resources, adopt, subject to approval by the county assembly, a centralised county
financial management service.
Responsibilities of accounting officers designated for county government
entities.
149. (1) An accounting officer is accountable to the county assembly for ensuring
that the resources of the entity for which the officer is designated are used in a way
that is—
(a) lawful and authorised; and
(b) effective, efficient, economical and transparent.
(2) In carrying out a responsibility imposed by subsection (1), an accounting
officer shall, in respect of the entity concerned—
(a) ensure that all expenditure made by the entity complies with subsection
(1);
(b) ensure that the entity keeps financial and accounting records that comply
with this Act;
(c) ensure that all financial and accounting records that the entity keeps in any
form including in electronic form are adequately protected and backed up;
(d) ensure that all contracts entered into by the entity are lawful and are
complied with;
(e) ensure that all applicable accounting procedures are followed when
acquiring or disposing of goods and services and that, in the case of goods,
adequate arrangements are made for their custody, safe guarding and
maintenance;
(f) bring a matter to the attention of the County Executive Committee
member responsible for the entity if, in the accounting officer’s opinion a
decision or policy or proposed decision or policy of the entity may result
in resources being used in a way that is contrary to subsection (1);
(g) prepare a strategic plan for the entity in conformity with the medium term
fiscal framework and financial objectives of the county government;
(h) prepare estimates of expenditure of the entity in conformity with the
strategic plan referred to in paragraph (g);
(i) submit the estimates of an entity, which is not a county corporation, to the
County Executive Committee member for finance;
(j) submit the estimates of an entity, which is a county corporation, to
the executive committee member responsible for the entity who, after
approving it, shall forward it to the County Executive Committee member
for finance;
(k) not later than three months after the end of each financial year, prepare
annual financial statements for that financial year and submit them to the
Auditor-General for audit, with a copy to the County Treasury;

-- 104 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 105
(l) try to resolve any issues resulting from an audit that remain outstanding;
(m) manage the assets of the entity to ensure that it receives value for money
when acquiring, using or disposing of its assets;
(n) dispose of assets at the most competitive price and at the lowest possible
cost ensuring that the proceeds from all asset disposals are deposited in a
bank account of the entity;
(o) ensure that the respective county government entity has adequate systems
and processes in place to plan for, procure, account for, maintain, store and
dispose of assets, including an asset register that is current, accurate and
available to the relevant County Treasury or the Auditor-General;
(p) provide the County Treasury with any information it requires to fulfil its
functions under this Act;
(q) provide information on any frauds, losses, or any violations of subsection
(1) and provide explanations for the actions taken to prevent similar
conduct in future; and
(r) carry out such other responsibilities as may be specified in regulations by
the County Executive Committee member for finance.
(3) Not later than three months after the county assembly has adopted a report
by a committee of the county assembly with respect to a report submitted by the
Controller of Budget under Article 228(6) of the Constitution, an accounting officer
shall, for each entity for which the officer is designated—
(a) prepare a report on actions taken by the entity to implement any
recommendations made in the committee’s report as adopted by the
county assembly; and
(b) submit the report to the county assembly with a copy to the County
Treasury.
(4) Not later than one month after receiving a report by an accounting officer
under subsection (3), the County Treasury shall submit to the county assembly the
accounting officer’s report and any comments on the report by the County Treasury.
(5) The report referred to in subsection (3) shall be published and publicised.
Accounting officer of a county government entity may write off any loss.
150. (1) An accounting officer for a county government entity may write off any
loss not exceeding an amount, and in circumstances prescribed by regulations for
the purposes of this section.
(2) An accounting officer for a county government entity, may with the approval
of the County Executive Committee member for finance, write off a loss exceeding
the amount referred to in subsection (1) but not exceeding a further amount, and in
circumstances prescribed by the regulations approved by Parliament.
(3) The County Executive Committee member for finance may with the approval
of County Executive Committee authorise an accounting officer to write off a loss
exceeding the further amount referred to in subsection (2).

-- 105 of 625 --

106 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(4) An accounting officer for a county government entity shall maintain a record
of any losses that are written off during a financial year and shall include the record
in the entity’s financial statements for that year.
(5) Any loan write off is to be done in accordance with regulations approved by
Parliament.
Spending authority of accounting officer.
151. If a county government entity has expenditures that are charged on
the County Revenue Fund under the Constitution or an Act of Parliament or
county legislation, the accounting officer who has responsibility for that entity has
the authority to spend the money in accordance with the purposes specified in
legislation without an appropriation.
Power of accounting officers for county entities to make cash advances.
152. (1) An accounting officer for a county government entity may authorise
payment of cash advances to public officers employed in the entity to be used to
enable those officers to make payments for the entity or in the course of their duties.
(2) The power to authorise cash advances is subject to any limitations imposed
by the regulations.
(3) A public officer to whom a cash advance is made shall account for the use of
the advance within a reasonable time.
(4) A public officer shall return the balance of the cash advance together
with signed supporting documents for the cash expended in accordance with any
requirement set out in any of the following—
(a) the documents used to apply for or authorise the advance;
(b) any regulation prescribed for the purpose of this section; or
(c) a written notice given to the officer by the accounting officer.
(5) If a public officer to whom a cash advance has been made under subsection
(1) fails to account for the use of the advance, or fails to return it as required by
subsection (4)—
(a) the amount of the advance not accounted for or not returned becomes a
debt owed by the officer;
(b) the debt becomes subject to the payment of interest at a rate prescribed by
the regulations made for the purpose of this subsection; and
(c) the debt, including the interest on it, is recoverable by that entity by
making a deduction from any salary or other amount that is payable to the
officer.
Accounting officer to be responsible for managing assets and liabilities of
county government entity.
153. (1) The accounting officer for a county Government entity—
(a) is responsible for the management of the entity’s assets and liabilities; and

-- 106 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 107
(b) shall manage those assets in such a way as to ensure that the county
government entity achieves value for money in acquiring, using or
disposing of those assets.
(2) The accounting officer for a county government entity shall dispose of assets
only in terms of an Act of Parliament pursuant to Article 227 of the Constitution
and shall ensure that the proceeds from all asset disposals are credited into a bank
account of the entity.
Limited power of accounting officer to reallocate appropriated funds.
154. (1) An accounting officer shall not authorise the transfer of an amount that
is appropriated—
(a) for transfer to another county government entity or person;
(b) for capital expenditure except to defray other capital expenditure; or
(c) for wages to non-wage expenditures.
(2) An accounting officer for a county government entity may reallocate funds
between programs, or between Sub-Votes, in the budget for a financial year, but only
if—
(a) provisions made in the budget of a program or Sub-Vote are available and
are unlikely to be used;
(b) a request for the reallocation has been made to the County Treasury
explaining the reasons for the reallocation and the County Treasury has
approved the request; and
(c) the total of all reallocations made to or from a program or Sub-Vote does
not exceed ten percent of the total expenditure approved for that program
or Sub-Vote for that year.
(3) Regulations approved by the county assembly may prescribe requirements
for the reallocation of funds within Sub-votes or programs.
County government entity to maintain internal auditing arrangements.
155. (1) A county government entity shall ensure that it complies with this Act
and—
(a) has appropriate arrangements for conducting internal audit according to
the guidelines issued by the Accounting Standards Board; and
(b) if any regulations are in force under subsection (2), those regulations are
complied with.
(2) Regulations may prescribe requirements to be complied with in conducting
any audits.
(3) The arrangements for the conduct of internal auditing for a county
government entity include—
(a) reviewing the governance mechanisms of the entity and mechanisms for
transparency and accountability with regard to the finances and assets of
the entity;

-- 107 of 625 --

108 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) conducting risk-based, value-for-money and systems audits aimed at
strengthening internal control mechanisms that could have an impact on
achievement of the strategic objectives of the entity;
(c) verifying the existence of assets administered by the entity and ensuring
that there are proper safeguards for their protection;
(d) providing assurance that appropriate institutional policies and procedures
and good business practices are followed by the entity; and
(e) evaluating the adequacy and reliability of information available to
management for making decisions with regard to the entity and its
operations.
(4) A county government entity shall ensure that the arrangements for
conducting internal audits in respect of the entity are in accordance with
international best practices for internal auditing.
(5) A county government entity shall establish an internal auditing committee
whose composition and functions are to be prescribed by the regulations.
Disciplinary measures against public and accounting officers.
156. (1) If an accounting officer reasonably believes that a public officer
employed by a county government entity has engaged in improper conduct in
relation to the resources of the entity, the accounting officer shall—
(a) take appropriate measures to discipline the public officer in accordance
with regulations; or
(b) refer the matter to be dealt in terms of the statutory and other conditions
of employment applicable to that public officer.
(2) If the County Executive Committee Member for finance reasonably believes
that an accounting officer has engaged in improper conduct within the meaning of
subsection (4), the County Executive Committed member for finance shall—
(a) take appropriate measures to address the matter in accordance with laid
down procedures; or
(b) refer the matter to be dealt with in terms of the statutory and other
conditions of employment applicable to that public officer.
(3) The measures referred to in subsection (2)(a) include the County Executive
Committee member for finance revoking the designation as accounting officer.
(4) For the purposes of this section, a public officer or accounting officer engages
in improper conduct if the officer—
(a) contravenes or fails to comply with this Act or any regulation in force;
(b) undermines any financial management procedures or controls;
(c) makes or permits an expenditure that is unlawful or has not been properly
authorised by the entity concerned; or
(d) fails without reasonable cause to pay eligible and approved bills promptly
in circumstances where funds are provided for.

-- 108 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 109
(5) Disciplinary measures under this section may not be taken against a public
officer or accounting officer under subsection (1)(a) or (2)(a) unless the officer has
been given an opportunity to be heard in relation to the alleged improper conduct
concerned.
Receivers and collectors of county government revenue
Designation of receivers of county government revenue.
157. (1) The County Executive Committee member for finance shall, in writing,
designate persons to be responsible for collecting, receiving and accounting for such
county government revenue as the County Executive Committee member for finance
may specify in their letters of designation.
(2) A receiver of county government revenue is responsible to the County
Executive Committee member for finance for ensuring that the revenue for which
the receiver is responsible is collected or recovered, and is accounted for.
Receiver may authorise public officer to be collector of revenue.
158. (1) A receiver of revenue for a county government may authorise any public
officer employed by that county government or any of its entities to be a collector
of revenue for the purpose of collecting revenue for that county government and
remitting it to the receiver.
(2) Any other public officer, other than a receiver of revenue or collector of
revenue for a county government, who collects revenue for that Government shall,
not later than three days after receiving it, deliver the revenue to a receiver or
collector of revenue for that county government.
(3) A receiver of revenue for a county government shall provide quarterly
statements to the County Treasury with copies to the National Treasury and the
Commission on Revenue Allocation.
Powers of County Executive Committee member for finance to waive or vary
tax, fees or charges.
159. The County Executive Committee member for finance may waive a county
tax, fee or charge imposed by the county government and its entities in accordance
with criteria prescribed in regulations provided that—
(a) the County Treasury shall maintain a public record of each waiver together
with the reason for the waiver and report on each waiver in accordance
with section 164 of this Act;
(b) a State Officer may not be excluded from payment of a tax, fee or charge by
reason of the office of the State Officer or the nature of work of the State
Officer; and
(c) such waiver or variation has been authorised by an Act of Parliament or
county legislation.
Kenya Revenue Authority may be appointed collector.
160. The County Executive Committee member for finance may authorise the
Kenya Revenue Authority or appoint a collection agent to be a collector of county

-- 109 of 625 --

110 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
government revenue for the purposes of this Part on such terms and conditions as
may be agreed in writing in accordance with regulations.
County government revenue raising measures to conform to Article 209(5) of
the Constitution.
161. In imposing a tax or other revenue raising measure, a county government
shall ensure that the tax or measure conforms to Article 209(5) of the Constitution
and any other legislation, and before imposing any tax or revenue raising measures
under this Article, shall seek views of the Cabinet Secretary and the Commission on
Revenue Allocation.
Obligations of County Public Officers
Obligations of public officers with respect to county government resources.
162. (1) Every public officer employed in or by the county government shall
comply with the Constitution and all laws relating to conduct of public officers when
carrying out a responsibility imposed, or exercising a power conferred, by this Act.
(2) Every public officer shall also—
(a) comply with the provisions of this Act so far as they are applicable to the
officer;
(b) ensure that the resources within the officer’s area of responsibility are used
in a way that—
(i) is lawful and authorised; and
(ii) effective, efficient, economical and transparent; and
(c) within the officer’s area of responsibility—
(i) ensure that adequate arrangements are made for the proper use,
custody, safeguarding and maintenance of public property; and
(ii) use the officer’s best efforts to prevent any damage from being done
to the financial interests of the county government.
Financial reporting by county government entities
County government to prepare annual financial statement.
163. (1) At the end of each financial year, the County Treasury shall, for the
county government, consolidate the annual financial statements in respect of all the
county government entities in formats to be prescribed by the Accounting Standards
Board.
(2) The County Treasury shall include in the consolidated financial statements—
(a) a statement of all money paid into and paid out of the County Exchequer
Account;
(b) a summary of—
(i) the appropriation accounts and statements prepared by accounting
officers under section 164; and
(ii) the statements prepared by receivers of revenue under section 165;

-- 110 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 111
(c) a statement of payments, if any, made out of the County Exchequer
Account that are authorised by legislation other than an Appropriation
Act;
(d) a statement of the total amount of debt of the county government that is
outstanding at the end of the financial year;
(e) a statement of the debt guaranteed by the national government at the end
of the financial year;
(f) such other statements as the county assembly may require; and
(g) a statement on the summary of the accounts from the county assembly.
(3) The County Treasury shall ensure that the statements and summaries referred
to in subsection (2) are in a form that is in accordance with the accounting standards
prescribed and published by the Accounting Standards Board from time to time.
(4) Not later than four months after the end of each financial year, the County
Treasury shall—
(a) submit the financial statements and summaries referred to in subsection
(1) to the Auditor-General; and
(b) deliver a copy to the National Treasury, Controller of Budget and the
Commission on Revenue Allocation.
Annual reporting by accounting officers.
164. (1) At the end of each financial year, the accounting officer for a county
government entity shall prepare financial statements in respect of the entity in
formats to be prescribed by the Accounting Standards Board.
(2) The accounting officer shall include in the financial statements—
(a) appropriation accounts, showing—
(i) the services for which the appropriated money was spent;
(ii) the amounts actually spent on each service; and
(iii) the status of each Vote compared with the appropriation for the
Vote; and
(iv) a statement explaining any variations between the actual
expenditure and the sums Voted; and
(v) any other information specified by the County Treasury;
(b) a statement of the entity’s debt that is outstanding at the end of the
financial year;
(c) a statement of the entity’s debt guaranteed by the national government as
at the end of the financial year;
(d) a statement of the entity’s assets and liabilities as at the end of the
financial year in respect of—
(i) each Vote, clearly identifying between recurrent and development
expenditure; and
(ii) funds and deposits;

-- 111 of 625 --

112 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(e) a statement of the accounting policies followed in preparing the financial
statement; and
(f) a statement of the county government entity’s performance against
predetermined objectives.
(3) The accounting officer shall prepare the financial statements in a form
that complies with relevant accounting standards prescribed and published by the
Accounting Standards Board from time to time.
(4) Within three months after the end of each financial year, the accounting
officer for an entity shall—
(a) submit the entity’s financial statements to the Auditor-General; and
(b) deliver a copy of the statements to the relevant County Treasury, the
Controller of Budget, and the Commission on Revenue Allocation.
(5) In the case of an entity that is a County corporation, the accounting officer
shall submit a copy of the county corporation’s financial statements to the County
Executive Committee member responsible for that corporation who shall approve
and forward the statements to the County Executive Committee member for finance.
Annual reporting by receivers of revenue.
165. (1) At the end of each financial year, a receiver of revenue for a county
government shall prepare an account in respect of the revenue collected, received
and recovered by the receiver during that financial year.
(2) The account under subsection (1) shall include—
(a) a statement of receipts and disbursement in a form prescribed by the
Accounting Standards Board from time to time; and
(b) a statement of arrears of revenue.
(3) Not later than three months after the end of the financial year, the receiver
of revenue for the county government shall—
(a) submit the accounts to the Auditor-General; and
(b) deliver a copy to the National Treasury, the Controller of Budget, County
Treasury, and the Commission on Revenue Allocation.
(4) Not later than two months after the end of each financial year, a receiver of
revenue for the county government shall submit to a county assembly a report with
respect to all waivers and variations of taxes, fees or charges granted by the receiver
during that year.
(5) The receiver shall include in the report the following details in respect of each
waiver or variation—
(a) the full name of each person benefiting from the waiver or variation;
(b) the amount of tax, fee or charge affected by the waiver or variation;
(c) the year to which the waiver or variation relates;
(d) the reasons for waiver or variation; and

-- 112 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 113
(e) the legislation in terms of which the waiver was authorised.
Accounting officer to prepare quarterly reports for county government entity.
166. (1) An accounting officer for a county government entity shall prepare a
report for each quarter of the financial year in respect of the entity.
(2) In preparing a quarterly report for a county government entity, the accounting
officer shall ensure that the report—
(a) contains information on the financial and non-financial performance of
the entity; and
(b) is in a form determined by the Accounting Standards Board.
(3) Not later than fifteen days after the end of each quarter, the accounting officer
shall submit the quarterly report to the County Treasury.
(4) Not later than one month after the end of each quarter, the County Treasury
shall—
(a) consolidate the quarterly reports and submit them to the county assembly;
(b) deliver copies to the Controller of Budget, National Treasury and the
Commission on Revenue Allocation; and
(c) publish and publicise them.
(5) In the case of an entity that is a county corporation, the accounting officer
for the corporation shall also submit a copy of the quarterly report to the County
Executive Committee member responsible for the corporation, who, upon approving
it, shall submit a copy to the County Treasury.
Annual reporting by Administrators of county public funds.
167. (1) The administrator of a county public fund established by the
Constitution, an Act of Parliament or county legislation shall prepare financial
statements for the fund for each financial year in a form prescribed by the Accounting
Standards Board.
(2) In preparing a financial statement for a county public fund, the administrator
shall ensure that the report contains information on the financial and non-financial
performance of the fund.
(3) Not later than three months after the end of each financial year, the
administrator of a county public fund shall submit the financial statements prepared
under this section to the Auditor General.
(4) The administrator shall submit a copy of the report to the County Executive
Committee member responsible for the fund.
Quarterly reporting by administrators of county public funds.
168. (1) The administrator of a county public fund established by the
Constitution, an Act of Parliament or county legislation, shall prepare quarterly
financial statements for the fund in a form prescribed by the Accounting Standards
Board.

-- 113 of 625 --

114 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(2) In preparing a quarterly financial statement for a county public fund, the
administrator shall ensure that the report contains information on the financial and
non-financial performance of the fund.
(3) Not later than fifteen days after the end of each quarter, the administrator
shall submit the quarterly report to the County Treasury and a copy to the Controller
of Budget.
Financial management in urban areas and cities
Application of this part to urban areas and cities.
169. (1) This part applies to urban areas and cities as defined in the Urban Areas
and Cities Act, 2011.
(2) For purposes of this Act, all provisions of this Act that apply to county
government entities shall apply to urban areas and cities, unless expressly stated
otherwise.
Accounting Officer of urban area or city.
170. The accounting officer for an urban area or city shall be designated as
provided in section 148 of this Act, and as accounting officer shall—
(a) exercise the functions and powers assigned to an accounting officer in
terms of this Act; and
(b) be responsible and accountable to the county assembly for the financial
management and administration of the urban area or city.
Urban area or city accounting officer responsibilities in revenue management.
171. (1) The accounting officer of an urban area or city is responsible for the
management of the revenue received by that urban area or city in accordance with
section 172.
(2) The accounting officer shall—
(a) for the purposes of collection systems consistent with this Act and the
Urban Areas and Cities Act, manage, the urban area or city’s credit control
and debt collection policy;
(b) immediately inform the County Executive Committee member for finance
of any payments due to the urban area or city by a State organ in respect of
city or urban area tax, or services, if such payments are regularly in arrears
for periods of more than thirty days; and
(c) take all reasonable steps to ensure that any funds collected by the urban
area or city on behalf of another organ of state is transferred to that organ
of state within three days and that such funds are not used for purposes
of the city or urban area.

-- 114 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 115
Financing of urban areas or cities.
172. Subject to the Constitution and any other Act of Parliament, and with the
approval of the County Assembly, an urban area or city may be funded through any
of the following sources—
(a) revenue arising from rates, fees, levies, charges and other revenue raising
measures which is retained by the urban area or city for the purpose of
defraying its costs for providing services;
(b) revenue allocated by the county government to the urban area or city;
(c) investment income;
(d) grants and donations; or
(e) borrowing as provided for under section 140 of this Act.
Criteria for allocating funds to urban areas or cities by county governments.
173. (1) In allocating funds to the urban areas or cities under section 172(b),
the county government shall use objective criteria reflecting the service demand and
responsibilities of the urban area or city.
(2) The objective criteria to be prescribed in county legislation, may include,
among others, adjustments for—
(a) the proportional population, calculated as the population of the urban area
or city divided by the total population of the county;
(b) the relative area, calculated as the area of the urban area or city divided
by the total county area;
(c) the relative poverty levels based on objective measures of relative poverty;
(d) the relative per capita revenue collection estimated as urban area or city
per capita revenue collection divided by the County per capita revenue
collection;
(e) an objective measure to account for price differentials in providing similar
services in the urban area and city relative to the rural areas of the county;
(f) a minimum amount to ensure effective delivery of essential services and
responsibilities assigned to the urban area or city; and
(g) incentives to encourage urban areas and cities to exercise prudent financial
management as well as transparency and accountability in public financial
management.
(3) In approving the criteria in subsection (2), the County Assembly will seek the
recommendations of the Commission on Revenue Allocation.
Principles to be observed by urban areas or cities in managing public finances.
174. The accounting officer of an urban area or city shall observe the following
principles in managing public finances of that entity—
(a) the actual expenditure on the personnel shall not exceed a percentage of
their allocation to be prescribed by the County Assembly;

-- 115 of 625 --

116 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) on an annual basis the urban area’s or city’s recurrent expenditure shall
not exceed its revenue;
(c) in the medium term, the recurrent expenditure may not exceed a
percentage of total revenue, which will be approved by the county
assembly;
(d) an urban area’s or city’s debts are maintained at a sustainable level; and
(e) over the medium term, the proceeds of borrowing by an urban area or city
are used only for purposes of financing development expenditure and not
recurrent expenditure.
Budget and budget process for urban areas or cities.
175. (1) An urban area or city shall develop a strategic plan based on the
integrated development plan that is consistent with the County Fiscal Strategy
Paper.
(2) The strategic plan along with any further guidelines from the County Treasury
on the county budget process shall form a basis for development of the urban area’s
or city’s budget proposals.
(3) No later than the 30th August of every year, the County Treasury shall issue
budget instructions to the urban areas or cities.
(4) The instructions shall prescribe the manner, form and timing in which the
budget requests shall be submitted and subsequently reported on.
(5) The urban area or city shall on the basis of the instructions in subsections (3)
and (4) prepare and submit budget requests to the County Treasury upon approval
by the Board in sufficient time, in the case of cities and municipalities, for their
approval as part of the annual county Appropriation Bill.
(6) The budget estimates in subsection (5) shall include the current services
budget, representing the cost of maintaining the urban area or city services at
current levels.
(7) The budget submission shall also contain new services requests, covering
one-time expenditures for the construction and maintenance of facilities in the
urban area’ or city.
(8) The County Treasury shall evaluate the budget proposal and make
recommendations to the urban area or city to enable the preparation of the itemized
annual budget for consideration and approval by its Board.
(9) In preparing the strategic plan in subsection (1) and the annual budget
estimates in subsection (5), the accounting officer of an urban area or city—
(a) shall ensure that the public is given an opportunity to participate in the
preparation process as outlined in the second schedule of the Urban Areas
and Cities Act, 2011; and
(b) for that purpose, may publish guidelines for public participation.

-- 116 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 117
(10) The Accounting Officer of each urban area or city shall—
(a) publish and publicise the strategic plan within seven days following its
adoption; and
(b) publish and publicise the annual budget estimates within twenty one days
after the county assembly has approved the budget estimates.
Response to delays in approval of annual budgets by urban areas or cities.
176. (1) If the annual County Appropriation Act for the financial year has not
been assented to or is not likely to be assented to by the beginning of the financial
year, the relevant county assembly may authorise the withdrawal of funds from the
County Revenue Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure of an urban area or
city in accordance with subsection (2).
(2) Funds withdrawn under subsection (1)—
(a) may only be used to meet expenditure necessary to carry on the services
of the urban area or city during the financial year concerned using the
estimates submitted to the county assembly for approval; and
(b) may not exceed in total one-half of the amount included in the estimates
of expenditure submitted to the county assembly for approval.
Borrowing by urban areas or cities.
177. (1) An urban area or city may borrow only—
(a) from the county government;
(b) through its county government; or
(c) by way of a bank overdraft.
(2) Any borrowing by an urban area or city shall be subject to such terms and
conditions as the county assembly may impose, and in the case of paragraph (b), in
accordance with the provisions of section 140 of this Act.
Conditions in which urban areas or cities may receive grants.
178. (1) An urban area or city may receive a grant or donation from a
development partner only with the approval of the County Executive Committee
member for finance concerned, and only as provided under section 138 of this Act.
(2) The grants referred to in subsection (1) shall be expended in accordance with
the strategic plan as provided for under section 175.
(3) As soon as possible after receiving the grant or donation, the recipient
shall notify the County Executive Committee member for finance and the Cabinet
Secretary of the receipt.
(4) If a project that is being financed by a grant or donation from a development
partner requires county government funding, the project may only be started when—
(a) the required funding has been appropriated in accordance with this Act or
is otherwise authorised by legislation; or

-- 117 of 625 --

118 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(b) the County Executive Committee member for finance has given a written
authorisation for the project to begin.
(5) The recipient of a grant or donation from a development partner shall record
the amount or value of the grant or donation in its accounts.
(6) Subject to Article 229(4) of the Constitution, the recipient of a grant or
donation from a development partner shall administer and account for the grant or
donation by using government financial and accounting laws, rules and regulations
and, administrative procedures, accounting and auditing procedures, or any of
its financial accounting rules and procedures for accounting for the receipt or
expenditure of money that are specified in, or referred to, in any agreement between
the recipient and the development partner.
(7) The County Executive Committee member for finance may in addition to the
audit above, permit a donor of a grant to audit such funds on the basis of its own
financial accounting rules.
Urban areas or cities bank accounts.
179. (1) An urban area or city shall open and maintain a bank account in the
name of the Urban Area or City, and with the approval of the respective County
Executive Committee member for finance.
(2) All money received by an urban area or city shall be paid into its bank account
or accounts, and this shall be done promptly and in accordance with this Act and any
requirements that may be prescribed.
Reporting by urban areas or cities.
180. (1) The Board of an urban area or city shall ensure that the urban area or
city follows the guidelines prescribed by the Accounting Standards Board.
(2) The Accounting Officer of an urban area or city shall prepare an annual report
including accounts in accordance with the provisions of the Urban Areas and Cities
Act, 2011 and other reports as required by this Act.
(3) The annual report of an urban area or city shall contain such additional
information as is necessary to enable an informed assessment of the activities of the
urban area or city.
Transitional arrangements.
181. All directions, resolutions, orders and authorizations on financial
management given or issued by local authorities established under the Local
Government Act (Repealed) and subsisting or valid immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been given, issued or made
pursuant to the Urban Areas and Cities Act (Cap. 275) and this Act as the case may
be, until the expiry, amendment or repeal of these Acts.

-- 118 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 119
Establishment and dissolution of County Corporations and additional
requirements for County Corporations and county government-linked corporations
Establishment and dissolution of county corporations.
182. (1) A county corporation may be established or dissolved only with the prior
approval of the County Executive Committee, which may be given only after taking
into account any recommendations of the County Treasury regarding the financial
implications of establishing or dissolving the county corporation.
(2) The regulations shall prescribe the criteria to be used in establishing or
dissolving county corporations and the regulations shall be tabled in the county
assembly for approval.
Restrictions on county government investing in county government-linked
corporations.
183. (1) The county government or county government entity may not invest—
(a) in a county corporation; or
(b) in a county government-linked company,
without the prior approval of the County Executive Committee, which may be
given only after taking into account any recommendations of the County Treasury
regarding the financial implications of the investment.
Responsibility for monitoring financial performance of county corporations.
184. (1) The County Executive Committee member for that entity is responsible
for monitoring—
(a) the financial performance of County corporations and county government-
linked corporation; and
(b) the performance of any functions or activities that affect the financial
performance of those county corporations.
(2) The responsibilities of the County Executive Committee member for that
entity under subsection (1) shall include in particular—
(a) analysing financial and other reports that are required to be prepared by a
county corporation under any Act or county legislation;
(b) reporting to the County Executive Committee on the performance of those
county corporations; and
(c) making recommendations to the County Executive Committee as to how
a particular county corporation or county government-linked corporation
could improve its performance.
Annual reporting by the County Treasury on county corporations.
185. (1) Not later than four months after the end of each financial year, the
County Treasury shall prepare and submit to the county assembly a consolidated
report summarising the extent of county government involvement or investment in,
or funding of, all county corporations and county government-linked corporations
for the financial year.

-- 119 of 625 --

120 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(2) The report in subsection (1) shall include information on—
(a) the date of incorporation and objects of the county corporation;
(b) the amount of county government shareholding, directly or indirectly, in
the county corporation;
(c) any changes in the shareholding of the county corporation during the
financial year;
(d) the amount of any funding in the form of grants or subsidies provided
by the county government to the county corporation or public entity,
excluding profit making entities, during the financial year;
(e) the amount of any loans made by the government to the county
corporation, during the financial year;
(f) the cumulative amount of undischarged loans in respect of the
corporation;
(g) the amount of profit or loss of the County corporation for the financial
year;
(h) the amount of any revenue received by the county government from the
county corporation during the financial year, including dividends, interest
and proceeds from any divestiture of assets of the county corporation;
(i) the payments made, or losses incurred, by the county government to
meet contingent liabilities as a result of loans during the financial year,
including payments made in respect of loan write-offs or waiver of interest
on loans; and
(j) an assessment of the financial and related non-financial performance of
the county corporation for the financial year.
(3) Once every three years, the County Executive Committee member responsible
for matters relating to public investments shall prepare a report on the need
for the county government continued involvement in, or funding of, the County
Corporation or county government-linked company.
(4) Copies of the reports prepared in subsections (1) and (3) shall be submitted to
the Controller of Budget, the Commission on Revenue Allocation and the Auditor-
General.
Definitions for purposes of sections 182, 183 and 184.
186. For the purposes of sections 182, 183 and 184—
(a) “county government-linked corporation” means a county corporation
in which the county government is a shareholder with less than fifty
percent of the share capital of the corporation; and
(b) “invest” means any form of funding, or potential funding, provided to
a County corporation, including providing share capital, loans, grants or
subsidies.

-- 120 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 121
PART V – RELATIONS BETWEEN NATIONAL AND COUNTY
GOVERNMENTS ON BUDGET AND ECONOMIC MATTERS
Establishment of the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council
Establishment, purpose and composition of the Intergovernmental Budget
and Economic Council.
187. (1) There is established a council to be known as the Intergovernmental
Budget and Economic Council comprising—
(a) the Deputy President who shall be the Chairperson;
(b) the Cabinet Secretary;
(c) a representative of the Parliamentary Service Commission;
(d) a representative of the Judicial Service Commission;
(e) the Chairperson of the Commission on Revenue Allocation or a person
designated by the Chairperson;
(f) the Chairperson of the Council of County Governors;
(g) every County Executive Committee member for finance; and
(h) the Cabinet Secretary responsible for intergovernmental relations.
(2) The purpose of the Council is to provide a forum for consultation and
cooperation between the national government and county governments on—
(a) the contents of the Budget Policy Statement, the Budget Review and
Outlook Paper and the Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy;
(b) matters relating to budgeting, the economy and financial management and
integrated development at the national and county level;
(c) matters relating to borrowing and the framework for national government
loan guarantees, criteria for guarantees and eligibility for guarantees;
(d) agree on the schedule for the disbursement of available cash from the
Consolidated Fund on the basis of cash flow projections;
(e) any proposed legislation or policy which has a financial implication for the
counties, or for any specific county or counties;
(f) any proposed regulations to this Act; and
(g) recommendations on the equitable distribution of revenue between the
national and county governments and amongst the county governments
as provided in section 190; and
(h) any other matter which the Deputy President in consultation with other
Council members may decide.
(3) An appointed member of the Council holds office for two years and is eligible
for re-nomination and re-appointment at the end of a term of office for another term
not exceeding two years.

-- 121 of 625 --

122 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(4) The National Treasury shall provide secretariat services to the Council and
assign or appoint such support staff as may be necessary for the Council to effectively
perform its functions.
(5) The Council shall meet at least twice a year and the Deputy President shall
decide the time and agenda for meetings of the Council in consultation with the
other members of the Council.
(6) In the absence of the Chairperson from any meeting of the Council, the
Cabinet Secretary shall chair the meeting.
(7) The Council may determine its own rules and procedures in such manner as
it considers appropriate.
(8) The Council may invite other persons to attend any of its meetings.
Vacation of office by a member.
188. A member of the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council shall
cease to be a member if that person ceases to hold office by virtue of which he or she
became a member to the Council.
The process of sharing revenue
The process of sharing revenue.
189. The process of sharing revenue raised by the national government between
the national and county governments, and among the county governments, shall be
in accordance with the Constitution and this Act.
Recommendations of the Commission on Revenue Allocation.
190. (1) At least six months before the beginning of the financial year, or
at a later date agreed between the Cabinet Secretary and the Commission on
Revenue Allocation, the Commission shall submit to the Senate, the National
Assembly, the County Assembly, the National Executive and the County Executives,
recommendations for the following financial year regarding—
(a) an equitable division of revenue raised nationally, among the national and
county levels of government; and
(b) the determination of each county’s equitable share in the county share of
that revenue.
(2) When making its recommendations, the Commission shall take into account
the criteria listed in Article 203(1) of the Constitution.
Bills allocating revenue and additional allocations.
191. (1) Each year when the Budget Policy Statement is introduced, the Cabinet
Secretary shall submit to Parliament a Division of Revenue Bill, a County Allocation
of Revenue Bill and a County Governments Additional Allocations Bill prepared by
the National Treasury as provided in this Act for the financial year to which that
Budget relates.
(2) The Division of Revenue Bill shall specify the share of each level of
government of the revenue raised nationally for the relevant financial year.

-- 122 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 123
(3) The County Allocation of Revenue Bill shall specify—
(a) each county’s share of that revenue under subsection (2);
(b) deleted by Act No. 17 of 2022, s. 9(a)(iii).
(3A) A Bill making allocations under Article 202(2) of the Constitution shall
specify any other allocations to the counties from the National Government’s share
of that revenue and any conditions to which those allocations shall be made.
(4) Before the submission of the legislative proposals on the Division of Revenue
and County Allocation of Revenue, the Cabinet Secretary shall notify—
(a) the intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council; and
(b) the Commission on Revenue Allocation.
(5) When the legislative proposal on the Division of Revenue and County
Allocation of Revenue is submitted, it shall be accompanied by a memorandum
which explains—
(a) how the Bill takes into account the criteria listed in Article 203(1) of the
Constitution;
(b) the extent of the deviation from the Commission on Revenue Allocation’s
recommendations;
(c) the extent, if any, of deviation from the recommendations of the
Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council; and
(d) any assumptions and formulae used in arriving at the respective shares
mentioned in subsections (2) and (3).
[Act No. 6 of 2014, s. 9, Act No. 17 of 2022, s. 9(a).]
Intergovernmental agreements.
191A. (1) The National Treasury shall enter into an agreement with the
respective county government for the transfer of the respective conditional
allocation made to the county government pursuant to this Act.
(2) An agreement under subsection (1) shall set out any conditions that may be
attached to the conditional allocations made under this Act.
(3) Where a county government intends to enter into an agreement under
subsection (1), the county executive committee member shall submit the agreement
to the respective County Assembly for approval.
(4) The County Assembly shall, within fourteen days of submission of an
agreement under subsection (3), approve or reject the agreement.
(5) Where a County Assembly fails to consider an agreement under subsection
(3) within fourteen days, the agreement shall be deemed to be approved.
(6) An agreement under subsection (1) shall set out all conditions attached to an
allocation made under this Act.

-- 123 of 625 --

124 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(7) The respective county government shall forward the agreement approved
under this section to the Controller of Budget within seven days of approval.
[Act No. 17 of 2022, s. 9(b).]
Public participation.
191B. The county executive committee member shall facilitate public
participation on any agreement made pursuant to section 191A.
[Act No. 17 of 2022, s. 9(b).]
Execution of agreement for conditional allocation.
191C. An agreement under section 191A shall be—
(a) signed by an authorized person or officer; and
(b) published in the Kenya Gazette within a period of seven days of the
agreement.
[Act No. 17 of 2022, s. 9(b).]
Submission to Senate.
191D. (1) The National Treasury shall, within seven days of entering into an
agreement under section 191A, submit to the Senate and the Controller of Budget,
the agreement together with any other documents relating to the agreement.
(2) The National Treasury shall publish and publicize all agreements entered into
pursuant to section 191A.
[Act No. 17 of 2022, s. 9(b).]
Requisition of funds.
191E. Requisition of funds from the county revenue fund for the purposes of a
conditional grant shall be supported by the intergovernmental agreement approved
under section 191A.
[Act No. 17 of 2022, s. 9(b).]
PART VI – PUBLIC SECTOR ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD
Establishment of the Board.
192. There is established a Public Sector Accounting Standards Board which shall
perform the functions set out in this Part.
Composition of the Board.
193. (1) The Accounting Standards Board shall consist of a representative of
each of the following bodies who shall serve on a part-time basis—
(a) the National Treasury;
(b) the Controller of Budget;
(c) the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council;
(d) the Auditor-General;
(e) the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya;

-- 124 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 125
(f) the Association of Professional Societies of East Africa;
(g) the Capital Markets Authority;
(h) the Institute of Internal Auditors; and
(i) the Institute of Certified Public Secretaries of Kenya.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall appoint a chairperson of the Board from members
nominated under subsection (1).
(3) In making nominations to the Board, the respective organisations shall
ensure that their nominees are certified members in good standing of a professional
body in accounting or finance recognised by law in Kenya.
(4) Members of the Board except ex-officio members shall be appointed by the
Cabinet Secretary and serve for a term of three years, renewable once for a further
and final term of three years.
(5) The National Treasury shall provide secretariat services to the Board and
assign or appoint such support staff as may be necessary for the Board to effectively
perform its functions.
(6) The Board may establish and regulate its own operating procedures.
[Act No. 38 of 2016, s. 59.]
Functions of the Board.
194. (1) The Accounting Standards Board shall provide frameworks and set
generally accepted standards for the development and management of accounting
and financial systems by all State organs and public entities, and shall in particular
perform the following functions—
(a) set generally accepted accounting and financial standards;
(b) prescribe the minimum standards of maintenance of proper books of
account for all levels of Government;
(c) prescribe internal audit procedures which comply with this Act;
(d) prescribe formats for financial statements and reporting by all state organs
and public entities;
(e) publish and publicise the accounting and financial standards and any
directives and guidelines prescribed by the Board;
(f) in consultation with the Cabinet Secretary on the effective dates of
implementation of these standards, Gazette the dates for application of the
standards and guidelines; and
(g) perform any other functions related to advancing financial and accounting
systems management and reporting in the public sector.
(2) In setting the standards under subsection (1), the Board shall take into
account any relevant factors including—
(a) best international accounting practices; and
(b) the capacity of the relevant entity to comply with the standards.

-- 125 of 625 --

126 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
(3) The Board may set different standards for different categories of entities to
which these standards apply including to develop content, structure and format of
county frameworks and accounting and financial guidelines which are in line with
the setting of county standards.
(4) The Board shall monitor the adherence to the standards by all State organs
and public entities.
(5) The standards set by the Board shall promote transparency and
other Constitutional values and principles in effective, prudence and efficient
management of revenue, expenditure, assets and liabilities of the institutions to
which these standards apply.
Vacation of office and remuneration of Board members.
195. (1) A member of the Accounting Standards Board, other than an ex-officio
member, may—
(a) at any time resign from the Board by notice in writing to the chairperson;
(b) be removed from the Board if the member—
(i) has been absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board
without the permission of the chairperson;
(ii) is adjudged bankrupt or enters into a composition scheme or
arrangement with his or her creditors;
(iii) is convicted of an offence involving dishonesty or fraud;
(iv) is convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to imprisonment
for a term exceeding six months or to a fine exceeding one hundred
thousand shillings;
(v) is incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness or is deemed
unfit to discharge his or her duties as a member of the Board; or
(vi) ceases to be a member by virtue of the withdrawal of his or her
nomination to the Board by the nominating institution.
(2) The remuneration payable to members of the Board shall be determined by
the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
PART VII – ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
Offences by public officers.
196. (1) A public officer shall not spend public money otherwise than authorized
by the Constitution, an Act of Parliament or County legislation.
(2) A public officer shall not raise revenues other than in accordance with the
Constitution, an Act of Parliament or an Act of a County Assembly.
(3) A public officer shall not enter into any obligation that has financial
implications for the national government budget or a county government budget
unless the obligation is authorised by the Constitution, an Act of Parliament or an
Act of a County Assembly.
(4) A public officer shall not borrow money, issue a guarantee, indemnity or
security or enter into any other transaction that binds or may bind the national

-- 126 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 127
government entity or a county government entity to any future financial obligation,
unless the borrowing, guarantee, indemnity, security or other transaction is
authorised by this Act or by any other written law and, in the case of loans or
guarantees, is within the limits provided under this Act.
(5) A public officer shall not direct another public officer to do an act that
constitutes a contravention of, or a failure to comply with, this Act, the Constitution
or any other written law.
(6) A public officer who contravenes this section commits an offence and on
conviction is liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding two years or to a fine
not exceeding one million shillings, or to both.
(7) Where a national government entity or a county government entity—
(a) engages in an action that it is prohibited from doing by this Act; or
(b) fails to comply with an obligation imposed on it by this Act,
a public officer who assisted or facilitated the act, or who was a party to, or
contributed to, the failure, commits an offence and on conviction is liable to a
term of imprisonment not exceeding two years or to a fine not exceeding one
million shillings, or to both in addition to provisions under Article 226(5) of the
Constitution.
Offences of financial misconduct.
197. A public officer employed by the national government or a national
government entity commits an offence of financial misconduct if, without lawful
authority, the officer—
(a) issues public government securities, or varies their terms and conditions;
(b) opens a bank account in the name of the government;
(c) lends money on behalf of the Government;
(d) issues guarantees or indemnities on behalf of the Government;
(e) issues securities for loans made to the government;
(f) disposes of property belonging to or under the control of, that government
or entity;
(g) fails to pay into a government bank account any public money entrusted
to the officer or received by the officer for or on behalf of that government
or that entity;
(h) incurs expenditure or makes a commitment on behalf of that government
or entity;
(i) incurs wasteful expenditure on behalf of that government or entity;
(j) fails to deliver to that government or entity a gift or donation made on a
public or official occasion in accordance with the Public Officers Ethics Act
(Cap. 185B);
(k) fails to provide any information in the officer’s possession, or under
the officer’s control, in relation to the financial management, financial

-- 127 of 625 --

128 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
performance, or banking activities of that government or entity or in
relation to the management or control of an asset or liability of that
government or entity when required to do so, except where such refusal or
failure is required or authorised by this Act or any other written law;
(l) fails to keep proper records or conceals, or wrongfully destroys,
information that is required to be recorded;
(m) intentionally or recklessly obstructs or hinders a person while that person
is acting in the performance or exercise of the person’s functions or powers
under this Act;
(n) makes any statement or declaration, or gives any information or
certificate, lawfully required by or under this Act knowing it to be false or
misleading in a material respect;
(o) for the purpose of procuring for the public officer or any other person or
organisation—
(i) makes improper payment of public money belonging to or entrusted
to that government or entity; or
(ii) makes improper use of any public property of that government or
entity; or
(p) fails to remit revenue received contrary to the provisions of sections 76(2)
and 158(2) of this Act.
Other offences by public officers.
198. (1) A public officer commits an offence if that officer—
(a) takes possession of public funds or assets without lawful authority;
(b) misappropriates public funds or assets;
(c) conceals information on public finances to obtain a financial benefit either
for the officer or another person; or
(d) engages in a corrupt act.
(2) In this section, “corrupt act” includes soliciting or receiving an inducement.
Penalties for offences.
199. Except as otherwise provided by this Act, a person who is found guilty of
committing an offence under this Act for which no other punishment is given, that
person is liable on conviction to a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years or
to a fine not exceeding ten million shillings, or to both.
Duty of Principal Secretary to report suspected offences to relevant law
enforcement authority for investigation.
200. (1) If the Principal Secretary suspects that an offence may have been
committed under this Act, that Secretary shall take all practicable steps to report
the matter to the relevant law enforcement authority to enable that authority to
investigate the suspected offence and, if evidence of the offence is discovered,
institute proceedings to prosecute any person who is alleged to have committed it.

-- 128 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 129
(2) If the Principal Secretary fails to report a suspected offence as required by
subsection (1), that Principal Secretary is liable to disciplinary action in accordance
with—
(a) the terms and conditions of that Principal Secretary’s appointment or
employment; and
(b) any provisions prescribed by regulations for the purposes of this section.
Duty of County Chief Officer to report suspected offences.
201. (1) If the County Chief Officer suspects that an offence may have been
committed under this Act, he or she shall notify the County Executive Committee
member for finance and take all practicable steps to report the matter to the relevant
law enforcement authority to enable that authority to investigate the suspected
offence and, if evidence of the offence is discovered, to institute proceedings to
prosecute any person who is alleged to have committed it.
(2) If the County Chief Officer fails to report a suspected offence as required by
subsection (1), that County Chief Officer is liable to disciplinary action in accordance
with—
(a) the terms and conditions of that Chief Officer’s appointment or
employment; and
(b) any provisions prescribed by regulations for the purposes of this section.
Liability of public officer for certain losses sustained by national government.
202. (1) A public officer is personally liable for any loss sustained by the national
government that is attributable to—
(a) the fraudulent or corrupt conduct, or negligence, of the officer; or
(b) the officer’s having done any act prohibited by section 196, 197 and 198.
(2) The National Treasury may, by civil proceedings brought in a court of
competent jurisdiction, recover damages from a public officer for any loss for which
the officer is liable under subsection (1).
Liability of public officer for certain losses sustained by county government.
203. (1) A public officer is personally liable for any loss sustained by a county
government that is attributable to—
(a) the fraudulent or corrupt conduct, or negligence, of the officer; or
(b) the officer’s having done any act prohibited by sections 196, 197 and 198.
(2) The County Treasury may, by civil proceedings brought in a court of
competent jurisdiction, recover damages from a public officer for any loss for which
the officer is liable under subsection (1).

-- 129 of 625 --

130 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Cabinet Secretary may impose institutional sanctions on national government
entities.
204. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may apply sanctions to a national government
entity that—
(a) approves the contracting of debt beyond any debt limits provided under
this Act;
(b) defaults on a loan;
(c) provides inaccurate information to public officers regarding financial
matters;
(d) issues a guarantee without proper authorisation;
(e) issues a guarantee for an amount in excess of any limits set under this Act;
(f) creates liabilities in excess of its ability to finance those liabilities;
(g) fails to address issues raised by the Auditor-General to the satisfaction of
the Auditor-General; or
(h) contravenes section 196.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary may apply any of the following sanctions to a national
government entity that has done, or failed to do, anything referred to in subsection
(1)—
(a) impose on the entity reporting requirements additional to those required
by this Act or any other written law;
(b) suspend the ability of the entity to reallocate funds;
(c) withhold from the entity funds to which the entity would otherwise be
entitled under the Constitution or this Act;
(d) suspend the entity’s authority to borrow money;
(e) treat any accumulated liabilities as a charge on the entity’s future
revenues;
(f) appoint one or more administrators to administer the entity’s financial
affairs for such period as may be specified in the appointment.
PART VIII – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Powers of the Cabinet Secretary to make regulations.
205. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may make regulations, not inconsistent with this
Act respecting any matter that is necessary or convenient to be prescribed under this
Act or for the carrying out or giving effect to this Act.
(2) In making regulations under this Act, the Cabinet Secretary shall consult the
Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council.
(3) A provision of a regulation may—
(a) apply generally or be limited in its application;
(b) apply differently according to different factors;

-- 130 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 131
(c) authorise any matter or thing to be done from time to time; or
(d) do any combination of those things.
(3A) Despite the generality in subsection (1), the Cabinet Secretary may make
regulations for raising money by issuing a Sukuk bond which shall specify the
purpose for which money may be raised.
(3B) Money raised through a Sukuk bond may be raised within or outside Kenya
in Kenya shillings or in any other currency or medium of exchange.
(4) Regulations under subsection (1) shall not take effect unless approved by a
resolution passed by Parliament.
(5) Regulations approved under subsection (4) shall take effect on the day after
the date on which both Houses approved them or, if a later date is specified in the
regulations, on that later date.
(6) If a House of Parliament does not make a resolution either approving
or rejecting any regulations within fifteen sitting days after submission to it for
approval, the House shall be deemed to have approved those regulations.
[Act No. 15 of 2017, s. 48.]
Protection of public officers from liability.
206. Nothing done by any authorised person or public officer working under the
instructions of the National Treasury or County Treasury, if done in good faith, for
the purposes of executing the powers, functions or duties of the National Treasury
or County Treasury under the Constitution or this Act, renders that person or public
officer personally liable for any action, claim or demand.
Public participation.
207. (1) Regulations may provide for participatory governance for purposes of
this Act.
(2) Regulations made under this section may provide for the following matters—
(a) structures for participation;
(b) mechanisms, processes and procedures for participation;
(c) receipt, processing and consideration of petitions, and complaints lodged
by members of the community;
(d) notification and public comment procedures;
(e) public meetings and hearings;
(f) special needs of people who cannot read or write, people with disabilities,
women and other disadvantaged groups;
(g) matters with regard to which community participation is encouraged;
(h) the rights and duties of members of community; and
(i) any other matter that enhances community participation.

-- 131 of 625 --

132 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
Repeal of certain Acts.
208. The following Acts are repealed—
(a) the Fiscal Management Act (No. 5 of 2009);
(b) the Government Financial Management Act (No. 5 of 2004);
(c) the Internal Loans Act (Cap. 420);
(d) the Contingencies Fund and County Emergency Funds Act (No. 17 of 2011);
(e) the National Government Loans Guarantee Act (No. 18 of 2011); and
(f) the External Loans and Credits Act (Cap. 422).
209. Spent.
Savings and transitional provisions.
210. The savings and transitional provisions specified in the Second Schedule
have effect.
heading 1 heading 2
cell 1 cell 2
cell 3 cell 4

-- 132 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 133
FIRST SCHEDULE
CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ACTS
(s. 209)
Spent
SECOND SCHEDULE
SAVINGS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
(s. 210, Act No. 15 of 2014, s. 13.)
1. Deployment of staff to county government
On the commencement of this Act, and in line with Article 262(15) of the
Constitution, the National Treasury shall prior to the establishment of the county
government, deploy such staff to that county as may be necessary to support the
county in—
(a) carrying out its responsibilities under this Act; and
(b) performing its functions under the Constitution relating to matters of public
finance.
2. Performance of functions of Accounting Standards Board
On the commencement of this Act, and pending the establishment of the
Accounting Standards Board, the functions of the Board as provided for under this
Act shall continue to be performed by the relevant National Treasury department.
3. Abolition of Treasury
(1) On the commencement of this Act—
(a) the office known as the Treasury, as in existence immediately before
that commencement, is abolished; and
(b) subject to this Act, the National Treasury becomes responsible for
any matter for which the Treasury was responsible but which was not
completed before that commencement.
(2) On the commencement of this Act, all public officers employed in the
Treasury as in existence immediately before that commencement, become
public officers employed in the National Treasury on the same terms and
conditions as those on which they were employed immediately before that
commencement.
(3) Any reference to the Treasury in a written law is to be read as a reference to
the National Treasury.
4. Principal Secretary to the National Treasury
(1) On the commencement of this Act, any reference to the Principal Secretary to
the National Treasury in a written law is to be read as a reference to the Permanent
Secretary to the Treasury until the first election held under the Constitution.

-- 133 of 625 --

134 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
5. Accounting officers
A person holding office as an accounting officer shall continue in office until the
Cabinet Secretary designates otherwise.
6. Receivers of revenue
A person holding office as a receiver of revenue continues in office until the
Cabinet Secretary designates otherwise.
7. Contingencies Fund
(1) On the commencement of this Act—
(a) the Civil Contingencies Fund in operation under the Civil
Contingencies Fund Act (Cap. 425) is abolished; and
(b) any money held in that Fund is payable into the Contingencies Fund
established by Article 208 of the Constitution.
(2) Any reference to the Civil Contingencies Fund in a written law is to be read
as a reference to the Contingencies Fund established by Article 208 of the
Constitution.
8. Guarantee limit
Despite the repeal of the National Government Guarantee (Loans) Act (No. 18 of
2011) by this Act, the limit of contingent liability established by resolution of the
National Assembly on the 16th June 2011 under that Act continues in effect, until
such time as the National Assembly sets a financial limit under section 51 of this Act.
9. Existing public funds
Any public fund that was established before the coming into operation of this
Act and was in existence immediately before the coming into operation of this Act
is continued as a public fund under this Act.
10. Existing regulations
Any regulations, directions or instructions that were made or issued under
legislation that is repealed by this Act and that were in force immediately before
the coming into operation of this Act shall, so far as not inconsistent with this Act,
remain in force until regulations or instructions under this Act come into force.
11. Power to make savings and transitional regulations
(1) The regulations may contain provisions of a savings or transitional nature,
not inconsistent with this Schedule, consequent on the enactment of this Act.
(2) Any such provision may, if the regulations so provide, take effect from the
dale of assent to the Act concerned or a later date.
(3) To the extent to which any such provision takes effect from a date that is
earlier than the date of its publication in the Gazette, the provision does not
operate so as—
(a) to affect, in a manner prejudicial to any person (other than the national
government or any of its entities or a county government or any of

-- 134 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 135
its entities), the rights of that person existing before the date of its
publication; or
(b) to impose liabilities on any person (other than the national government
or any of its entities or a county government or any of its entities) in
respect of anything done or omitted to be done before the date of that
publication.
12. Timeline for implementation of program budget
The implementation of programme budgets shall commence in 2013/14 financial
year for the national government and in the 2015/16 financial year for the county
governments constituted under Chapter eleven of the Constitution.
13. Issues relating to repeal of the Local Government Act
All issues that may arise on the repeal of the Local Government Act (Cap. 265)
by the County Government Act, that are related to this Act, shall be dealt with and
discharged by the body responsible for matters relating to transition.
14. Cash disbursement to county governments
For the period in between the first general elections under the Constitution
and the end of the first financial year following the first general elections, cash
disbursements to the county governments shall be on quarterly basis and in
accordance with the transfer of functions to county governments.
15. Existing public offices of the Accountant-General and Internal Auditor-General
On the commencement of this Act, the public service offices of the Accountant-
General and the Internal Auditor-General established under the Government
Financial Management Act (No. 5 of 2004) (now repealed) shall continue in existence
as offices of the National Treasury established under section 11(2)(c) of this Act.
16. Existing debt limit
Despite the repeal of the External Loans and Credit Act (Cap. 422) by this Act, the
debt limit set by the National Assembly as in existence at the commencement of this
Act, shall continue in effect until such time as the National Assembly sets another
debt limit under section 50(2) of this Act.

-- 135 of 625 --

CHAPTER 412A
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT
INDEX TO SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION
Page
Under section 4(1)
The Declaration of the National Government Entities (State Organs) .............................. 139
Under section 24
The Public Finance Management (Senate Monitoring and Evaluation) Regulations ......... 175
Under section 24(2A)
The Public Finance Management (Parliamentary Catering Fund) Regulations ................. 184
Under section 24(3)
The Public Finance (Parliamentary Mortgage (Staff) Scheme Fund) Regulations ............. 189
The Public Finance Management (Parliamentary Car Loan (Members) Scheme Fund)
Regulations ....................................................................................................................... 196
The Public Finance Management (Parliamentary Car Loan (Staff) Scheme Fund) Regulations
........................................................................................................................................... 201
The Public Finance Management (Parliamentary Mortgage (Members) Scheme Fund)
Regulations ....................................................................................................................... 207
Under section 24(4)
The Public Finance Management (Roads Annuity Fund) Regulations .............................. 214
The Public Finance Management (State Officers House Mortgage Scheme Fund) Regulations
........................................................................................................................................... 223
The Public Finance Management (State Officers and Public Officers Motor Car Loan Scheme
Fund) Regulations ............................................................................................................. 231
The Public Finance Management (State Officers and Public Officers Motor Car Loan Scheme
Fund) Regulations ............................................................................................................. 241
The Public Finance Management (African Union and other International Organisations
Subscription Fund) Regulations ........................................................................................ 252
The Public Finance Management (Sports, Arts and Social Development Fund) Regulations
........................................................................................................................................... 255
The Public Finance Management (Tourism Promotion Fund) Regulations ....................... 265
The Public Finance Management (Biashara Kenya Fund) Regulations .............................. 277
The Public Finance Management (Tourism Promotion Fund) Regulations ....................... 285
The Public Finance Management (Coffee Cherry Advance Revolving Fund) Regulations ... 298
The Public Finance Management (Strategic Food Reserve Trust Fund) (Revocation)
Regulations ....................................................................................................................... 312
The Public Finance Management (National Drought Emergency Fund) Regulations ........ 314

-- 136 of 625 --

138 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
The Public Finance Management (National Roads Toll Fund) Regulations ....................... 335
The Public Finance Management (Financial Inclusion Fund) Regulations ....................... 349
The Public Finance Management (National Peace Support Operations Fund) Regulations,
2023 .................................................................................................................................. 361
The Public Finance Management (Ulinzi Prime Health Services Fund) Regulations, 2023 .. 368
The Public Finance Management (Wildlife Conservation Trust Fund) Regulations, 2023 .. 376
Public Finance (Kenya Millennium Development Fund) Regulations, 2024 ...................... 384
Under section 24(4)&(11)
The Public Finance Management (National Government Affirmative Action Fund) Regulations
........................................................................................................................................... 394
Under section 24(8)
The Government Coast Agency Clearing Fund (Winding-up) Order, 2023 ........................ 410
The Joint Consolidated Fund (Winding-up) Order, 2023 .................................................. 412
The Kenya Local Loans Support Fund (Winding-up) Order, 2023 ..................................... 414
The Pre-Shipment Inspection Fund (Winding-up) Order, 2023 ........................................ 416
The Treasury Main Clearance Fund (Winding-up) Order, 2023 ........................................ 418
Under section 24(8)
The Public Finance Management (Uwezo Fund) (Revocation) Regulations ....................... 420
The Public Finance Management (Youth Enterprise Development Fund) (Revocation)
Regulations ....................................................................................................................... 423
The Public Finance Management (Youth Enterprise Development Fund) (Revocation)
Regulations ....................................................................................................................... 425
Under section 58(9)
The Public Finance Management (Credit Guarantee Scheme) Regulations ...................... 427
Under section 77
The Court Fees Waiver ...................................................................................................... 439
Under section 205
The Public Finance Management (County Governments) Regulations ............................. 440
The Public Finance Management (National Government) Regulations ............................ 525
Under section 205 (1)
The Public Finance Management (Equalization Fund Administration) Regulations ......... 616

-- 137 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 139
[Subsidiary]
Declaration under section 4(1)
THE DECLARATION OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ENTITIES (STATE ORGANS)
[L.N. 33/2015]
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 4(1) of the Public Finance Management
Act (Cap. 412A), and regulation 211 of the Public Finance Management (National
Government) Regulations, the Cabinet Secretary for finance declares the following entities
set out in the Schedules to be national government entities—
SCHEDULE I
National Government Entities (State Organs)
No. National
Government
Entities
Enabling Legislation Mandate Sector
1. The Presidency. The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Head of state and head of Government of
Kenya. The President leads the executive
branch of the Government of Kenya and
is the Commander-in-Chief of the Kenya
Defence Forces.
National
government.
2. Ministry of Interior
and Coordination
of National
Government.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Coordinating the overall Government
business, maintenance of law and order,
campaign against drug abuse, provide
printing services to the Kenya
Government, State visits coordination,
establishing, implementing good-
policies and providing administrative
and leadership service.
National
government.
3. Ministry of
Devolution
and Planning.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
To provide effective leadership and
coordination in devolution and
planning, policy formulation
and tracking results for a globally
competitive and prosperous nation.
National
government.
4. Ministry of
Foreign Affairs
and International
Trade.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Management of Kenya’s Foreign
Policy, Management of Bilateral
and Multilateral Relations, Liaison
with International and Regional
Organizations, Management of Kenya’s
Missions and Embassies abroad ,
liaison with foreign missions in Kenya,
ratification of Treaties, Conventions
and Agreements, Management of
Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities,
Co-ordination of State and Official
Visits, Handling of Protocol Matters.
National
government.

-- 138 of 625 --

140 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
5. Ministry of
Education, Science
and Technology.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Inspection and supervision of education
institutions, teacher education and
management, schools administration
and programmes, Registration of
Education and Training Institutions,
Curriculum Development, Examinations
and Certification, School Equipment,
Early Childhood Education, Care and
Development, Primary and Secondary
Education, Special Education, University
Education.
National
government.
6. The National
Treasury.
The Constitution and
Presidential
circular on
Government
Structure and
Public Finance
Management Act.
To pursue prudent economic, fiscal,
and monetary policies and effectively
coordinate government
financial operations for rapid and
sustainable development of Kenya.
National
government.
7. Ministry of Health. The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Health Policy, Sanitation Policy,
Preventive and Promotive Health
Services, HIV/AIDS Programme and
other Sexually Transmitted Infections
(STIs) Treatment and Management,
Health Education, Family Planning,
Food and Food Handling, Health
Inspection and other Public Health
Services, Quarantine Administration,
Overall Sanitary Services, Insanitary
Nuisances, Curative Services, Clinics,
Dispensaries, Health Centres and
Hospitals, Registration of Doctors and
Para Medicals, Maternity Services,
Nurses and Midwives.
National
government.
8. Ministry of
Transport
and Infrastructure.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Transport Policy, Railways, Sea Ports,
Airports, Ferry Services, National
Shipping Line, Road Safety, Transport
Licensing, Registration and Insurance
of Motor Vehicles, Vehicle Inspection,
Civil Aviation, Maritime, Transport
infrastructure Development.
National
government.
9. Ministry of
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
The mandate of the ministry is to
monitor, protect, conserve and manage
the environment and natural resources
through sustainable exploitation for
socio-economic development aimed at
eradication of poverty, improving living
standards and ensuring that a clean
environment is sustained now and in the
future.
National
government.
10. Ministry of Lands,
Housing and Urban
Development.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Formulate and implement land policy,
undertake physical planning, register
land transactions, undertake land
surveys and mapping, land adjudication
and settlement, land valuation and
administration of state and trust land.
National
government.

-- 139 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 141
[Subsidiary]
11. Ministry of
Information,
Communications
and
Technology.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
The mandate of the ministry includes
Information and Broadcasting
Corporation, News Agency, Mass
Communication, Film Classification,
Postal Services and as an Appeal
Tribunal.
National
government.
12. Ministry of Sports,
Culture and Arts.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
To develop, promote, preserve and
disseminate Kenya's diverse cultural and
national heritage through formulation
and implementation of policies to build
national pride. Promote sports and
develop sports facilities to improve
livelihood of the Kenyan people.
National
government.
13. Ministry of Labour,
Social Security and
Services.
The Constitution,
Presidential circular
and various Acts of
Parliament.
Enforce labour laws, maintain industrial
peace, industrial training and promote
safety and health of employees; develop
and coordinate implementation of
policies and strategies for human
resource development, micro and small
enterprise sector and productivity
improvement.
National
government.
14. Ministry of
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
The mandate of the Ministry of
Agriculture is to promote and facilitate
production of food and agricultural
raw materials for food security and
incomes; advance agro based industries
and agricultural exports; and enhance
sustainable use of land resources as a
basis for agricultural enterprises.
National
government.
15. Ministry of Energy
and Petroleum.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
The mandate of the Ministry of Energy
is to facilitate the provision of clean,
secure, sustainable and affordable
energy services for social-economic
development while protecting the
environment.
National
government.
16. Ministry of
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure
The mandate of the Ministry of
Industrialization and Enterprise
Development is to promote and
facilitate Industrialization in the
country and to transform Kenya into a
globally competitive, regional industrial
hub in line with the Kenya Vision 2030.
17. Ministry of East
African Affairs,
Commerce and
Tourism.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Responsible for the formulation, co-
ordination and administration of policy
in respect to the tourism sector, trade
development policy, promotion of
retail and wholesale markets, fair trade
practices and consumer protection
promotion of trade domestically,
regionally and internationally
through creation of an enabling business
and investment environment.
National
government.
18. Ministry of
Mining.
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
The Ministry is mandated with the
formulation of mining policy, mineral
exploration and mining.
National
government.

-- 140 of 625 --

142 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
19. Ministry of
Defence
The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure
The Ministry is mandated with the
formulation of foreign defence policy.
National
Government.
20. Office of the
Attorney-General
and Department of
Justice.
The Constitution,
the Office of the
Attorney-General’s
Act (Cap. 6A) and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
The Office of the Attorney-General has
the overall responsibility of providing
legal advice to the Government and
its agencies. In execution of this
function, the Office is responsible for
providing efficient and professional
legal services to the government and the
public for the purposes of facilitating,
promoting and monitoring the rule of
law, the protection of human rights and
democracy.
National
government.
21. Parliament. The Constitution Parliament is established and derives its
mandate of making legislation from the
Chapter eight of Constitution of Kenya.
National
government.
22. The Judiciary. The Constitution. Judiciary is established and derives its
mandate as a dispute resolution organ
from Chapter Ten of the Constitution.
National
government.
23. Commission
on Revenue
Allocation (CRA).
The Constitution. The Commission on Revenue Allocation
is established under Article 215 of the
Constitution and derives its mandate
from Article 216 of Constitution. The
powers and functions of the Commission
on Revenue Allocation is to make
recommendations concerning the basis
for the equitable sharing of revenue
raised by the national government,
between the national governments and
among the county governments.
National
government.
24. Salaries and
Remuneration
Commission (SRC).
The Constitution
and the Salaries
and Remuneration
Commission Act
(Cap. 412D).
The Salaries and Remuneration
Commission is established and derives
its mandate from Article 230 of
Constitution and section 11 of the
Salaries and Remuneration Commission
Act (Cap. 412D). The powers and
functions of Salaries and Remuneration
Commission are to set and regularly
review the remuneration and benefits of
all State Officers and advice the national
government on the remuneration and
benefits of all public officers.
National
government.
25. Controller of
Budget
(CoB).
The Constitution. The Controller of Budget is established
and derives its mandate from Article
228 of Constitution. The powers and
functions of the Controller of Budget is
to oversee the implementation of the
budgets of the national governments
by authorising withdrawals from public
funds under Articles 204, 206, and 207 of
the Constitution.
National
government.

-- 141 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 143
[Subsidiary]
26. The Commission
for
Implementation of
the Constitution
(CIC).
The Constitution. The Commission for Implementation
of the Constitution is established and
draws its mandate of monitoring,
facilitating and overseeing the
development and administrative
procedures required to implement the
Constitution under section 5(6) of the
Sixth Schedule of Constitution.
National
government.
27. National
Intelligence
Service (NIS).
The Constitution
and the National
Intelligence Act
(Cap. 206).
The National Intelligence Service is
established and derives its mandate
from Article 242 of Constitution and
section 5 of the National Intelligence
Service Act (Cap. 206). The National
Intelligence Service is responsible
for security intelligence and counter
intelligence to enhance national
security.
National
government.
28. Kenya National
Commission on
Human Rights
and Equality
Commission.
The Constitution and
the Kenya National
Commission on
Human Rights Act
(Cap. 7I).
The Kenya National Commission on
Human Rights and Equality Commission
is established and derives
its mandate to promote respect for
human rights and develop a culture
of human rights in the Republic from
Article 59 of Constitution, and section
8 of the Kenya National Commission on
Human Rights Act (Cap. 7I).
National
government.
29. Teachers Service
Commission (TSC).
The Constitution
and the Teachers
Service Commission
Act (Cap. 2I2)
The Teachers Service Commission is
established and derives its mandate of,
among others, reviewing the standards
of education and training of persons
entering the teaching service from
Article 237 of Constitution and section
11 of the Teachers Service Commission
Act (Cap. 2I2).
National
government.
30. Ethics and Anti-
Corruption
Commission.
The Ethics and
Anti-Corruption
Commission Act
(Cap. 7H).
The Commission is established under
section 3 of the Ethics and Anti-
Corruption Commission
Act (Cap. 7H) and it is mandated
under section 11 of the Act to combat
and prevent corruption through
enforcement of the law, educating
the public and enlisting their support
against corruption and providing
preventive services through promotion
and development of good practices to
seal opportunities and loop holes that
facilitate corruption.
National
government.
31. Directorate
of Public
Prosecutions.
The Constitution
and the Office of the
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act
(Cap. 6B).
The Office of Director of Public
Prosecutions is established and draws
its state powers of prosecution under
Article 157 of the Constitution and
section 5 of the Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions Act (Cap. 6B)
National
government.

-- 142 of 625 --

144 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
32. Independent
Electoral and
Boundaries
Commission.
The Constitution
and the Independent
Electoral and
Boundaries
Commission Act
(Cap. 7C).
The Independent Electoral and
Boundaries Commission is established
and derives its mandate under Article 88
of the Constitution and section 4 of the
Act. The Commission is responsible for
conducting or supervising referenda and
elections to any elective body or office
established by the Constitution, and any
other elections as prescribed by an Act
of Parliament and, in particular, for—
the continuous registration of citizens as
voters; the regular revision of the voters’
roll; the delimitation of constituencies
and wards in accordance with the
Constitution; among others.
National
government.
33. Public Service
Commission.
The Constitution,
the Public Service
Commission Act
(Cap. 185) and
Presidential
circular on
Government
Structure.
The Public Service Commission is
established under Article 233 of the
Constitution. The Commission derives
its mandate of administration of the
public service under Article 234 of the
Commission and section 11 of the Public
Commission Act.
National
government.
34. Auditor-General. The Constitution and
Presidential circular
on Government
Structure.
Article 229 of the Constitution
authorises the nomination and
appointment of the Auditor-General
with mandate to authorization of issues
from exchequer account, audit of all
government accounts, audit of local
authorities accounts, audit of State
Corporations, Statutory Boards, Courts,
Commissions and Bodies.
National
government.
35. National Cohesion
and
Integration
Commission.
The National
Cohesion and
Integration Act (Cap.
7N).
The Commission is established under
section 15 of the Act with general
mandate to facilitate and promote
equality of opportunity, good relations,
harmony and peaceful co-existence
between persons of the different ethnic
and racial communities of Kenya, and
to advise the Government on all aspects
thereof.
National
Cohesion and
Integration
Commission
36. Police Oversight
Authority.
The Independent
Police Oversight Act.
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act with general
objectives of—
(a) holding the Police accountable to
the public in the performance of their
functions;
(b) giving effect to the provision of
Article 244 of the Constitution that the
Police shall strive for professionalism
and discipline and shall promote
and practice transparency and
accountability; and
(c) ensuring independent oversight
of the handling of complaints by the
Service.
Police
Oversight
Authority.

-- 143 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 145
[Subsidiary]
37. The Betting
Control
and Licencing
Board.
The Betting,
Lotteries and
Gaming Act.
(Cap. 131).
Betting Control and Licencing Board is
established under section 3 of Act with
mandate—
(a) to issue licences and permits in
accordance with this Act and any
regulations made thereunder;
(b) during the subsistence of a licence
or permit, to vary, or for good cause to
suspend or cancel it with
conditions; and
(c) to inquire into complaints against
licensees or permit-holders.
The Betting
Control
and Licencing
Board.
38. The National
Police
Service
Commission.
The Constitution and
the National Police
Service Commission
Act (Cap. 85)
The National Police Service Commission
is established under Article 246 (1) of
the Constitution. Its general mandate
under Article 246(3) and section 10 of
the Act is to recruit and appoint persons
to hold or act in offices in the service,
confirm appointments, and determine
promotions and transfers within the
National Police Service and observe due
process, exercise disciplinary
control over and removal of persons
holding or acting in offices within the
service.
The National
Police
Service
Commission.
39. The Transition
Authority.
The Transition
to Devolved
Government Act,
2012.
The Authority is established under
section 4 of the Act and is charged with
the responsibility of overseeing the
implementation of devolution under
the Constitution through policy and
legal advisory, resource mobilization,
oversight, capacity building and
coordination.
The Transition
Authority.
40. The Non-
Governmental
Organizations Co-
ordination Board.
The Non-
Governmental
Organizations Co-
ordination Act.
(Cap. 134).
The Non-Governmental Organizations
Co-ordination Board is established
under section 3 of the Act with general
mandate for the registration and co-
ordination of Non-Governmental
Organizations in Kenya.
The Non-
Governmental
Organizations
Co-ordination
Board.
SCHEDULE II
National Government Entities (Government Owned
Enterprises Operating on the Basis of Commercial Principles)

-- 144 of 625 --

146 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
No. National
Government
Entities
Enabling Legislation Mandate Sector
41. Agricultural
Finance
Corporation.
The Agricultural
Finance Corporation
Act.
(Cap. 323)
The Corporation is established
under section 3 of the Act for
development of agriculture and
agricultural industries by making
loans to farmers, groups and other
persons engaging in agriculture or
agricultural industries.
The National
Treasury
42. Industrial and
Commercial
Development
Corporation.
The Industrial
and Commercial
Development
Corporation Act
(Cap. 445)
Established under section 3 of the
Act for facilitating the industrial and
economic development of Kenya.
The National
Treasury
43. Miwani Sugar
Company
Ltd (Under
Receivership)
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for crushing sugar cane
and manufacture of sugar and related
products.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
44. Agro-Chemical
and Food
Company
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for carrying on all or any
other businesses of manufacturing
related to alcohol, export and
importation.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
45. Kenya Meat
Commission
(KMC)
The Kenya Meat
Commission Act
(Cap. 363)
Responsible for operating abattoirs
and purchasing and processing of
meat products.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
46. Muhoroni
Sugar Company
Ltd (Under
Receivership).
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for production of sugar
and related products.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
47. South Nyanza
Sugar Company
Limited.
The State
Corporations Act.
(Cap. 446).
Responsible for production of sugar
and related products.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
48. Chemilil Sugar
Company Ltd.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for production of sugar
and related products.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
49. Nzoia Sugar
Company Ltd.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for production of sugar
and related products.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
50. Kenya National
Trading
Corporation
(KNTC).
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486).
Promoting and growing wholesale
and retail trade through efficiently
trade in quality products and services
to ensure balance of supply and
demand in the Country's distribution
networks, while promoting e-
commerce and global trade with an
aim to maximizing stakeholder's
value.
East African Affairs,
Commerce and
Tourism.
51. Kenyatta
International
Convention
Centre.
The Tourism Act
(Cap. 381)
Established under section 40 of the
Act to promote business of meetings,
conferences and exhibitions.
East African Affairs,
Commerce and
Tourism.

-- 145 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 147
[Subsidiary]
52. Kenya Safari
Lodges and
Hotels Ltd.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486).
Responsible for provision of premium
hotel and lodge accommodation,
current conference and business
meeting venues, customized beach
and safari experiences as well as high
value niche products.
East African Affairs,
Commerce and
Tourism.
53. Bomas of Kenya. The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Mandated to preserve, maintain and
promote the rich diverse cultural
values of various ethnic groups of
Kenya.
East African,
Commerce and
Tourism.
54. Jomo Kenyatta
Foundation.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Mandated to advance education and
knowledge for poverty alleviation
through quality publishing and
provision of scholarships.
Education, Science
and Technology.
55. Kenya Literature
Bureau (KLB)
The Kenya Literature
Bureau Act (Cap.
209)
Established under section 3 of the
Act for, among others, carrying on
the business of
publishing, printing and distributing
literary, educational, cultural and
scientific books, periodicals, journals,
magazines, digital and electronic
material.
Education, Science
and Technology.
56. University
of Nairobi
Enterprises Ltd.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
The commercial arm of the
University of Nairobi charged with
the responsibility of promoting and
coordinating income-generating
activities in the University.
Education, Science
and Technology.
57. East African
Portland Cement.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for manufacture of
cement and related products.
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development.
58. Kenya Wine
Agencies Ltd
(KWAL).
Mandated to produce and distribute
wines and spirits to both domestic
and international markets.
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development.
59. New Kenya
Co-operative
Creameries.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for milk processing and
production of dairy products.
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development.
60. National Housing
Corporation.
The Housing Act
(Cap. 117).
Mandated to play a principal role
in the implementation of the
Government’s Housing Policies and
Programs.
Lands, Housing
and Urban
Development.
61. Kenya Post Office
Savings Bank
The Kenya Post
Office Savings Bank
Act (Cap. 493B)
Mandated to encourage and facilitate
personal saving among Kenyans.
The National
Treasury.
62. Consolidated
Bank of Kenya
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for providing banking
services.
The National
Treasury.
63. Kenya National
Assurance Co.
(2001) Ltd. (in
Liquidation)
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486).
A Life assurance company mandated
to take over the assets and liabilities
of the Closed Life Fund of the Kenya
National Assurance Company
Limited (under Liquidation).
The National
Treasury.
64. Kenya
Reinsurance
Corporation Ltd.
The Kenya
Reinsurance
Corporation Act,
(Cap. 487).
Mandated to undertake and transact
in any manner of reinsurance and
insurance business in and out of
Kenya.
The National
Treasury.
65. National Bank of
Kenya.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Mandated to help Kenyans get access
to credit and control their economy.
The National
Treasury.

-- 146 of 625 --

148 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
66. Kenya National
Shipping Line.
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for the provision of
ocean freight between Kenya and
global world.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
67. Kenya
Broadcasting
Corporation
The Kenya
Broadcasting
Corporation Act
(Cap. 221)
The Corporation is established under
section 3 of the Act to provide,
among others, independent and
impartial broadcasting services
of information, education and
entertainment in Kenya and outside
world.
Information,
Communication and
Technology.
68. Postal
Corporation of
Kenya
The Postal
Corporation Act
(Cap. 411)
The Corporation is established
under section 3 and is responsible
for provision of postal service in
Kenya and to encourage and facilitate
personal saving.
Information,
Communication and
Technology.
69. Kenya Airports
Authority (KAA)
The Kenya Airports
Authority Act (Cap.
395)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to facilitate,
develop and operate infrastructure
for aviation in Kenya.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
70. National Cereals
and Produce
Board (NCPB).
The National Cereals
and Produce Board
Act (Cap. 338)
The Board is established under
section 3 of the Act to provide for
market stabilization, famine relief
and strategic grain reserve in the
country.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
71. Agricultural
Development
Corporation.
Agricultural
Development
Corporation Act
(Cap. 444).
The Corporation is established under
section 3 of the Act to, among others,
promote the production of Kenya’s
essential agricultural inputs such
as seeds and pedigree and high
grade livestock including, hybrid
seed maize, cereal seed, potato
seed, pasture seed, vegetable seed,
pedigree and high grade cattle,
sheep, goats, pigs, poultry and bees,
and related functions.
The National
Treasury.
72. Kenya Electricity
Generating
Company
(KENGEN)
The Companies Act.
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for provision of electric
power generation.
Energy and
Petroleum.
73. Kenya Electricity
Transmission
Company
(KETRACO)
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for the development of
high voltage electricity transmission
infrastructure forming the backbone
of the National Transmission Grid.
Energy and
Petroleum.
74. Kenya Pipeline
Company (KPC)
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Responsible for the provision of
transporting and storing petroleum
products.
Energy and
Petroleum.
75. Kenya Ports
Authority (KPA)
The Kenya Ports
Authority Act (Cap.
391)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to provide for
a coordinated system of ports and
facilities relating thereto.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
76. Kenya Power
and Lighting
Company (KPLC)
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Mandated to transmit, distribute
and retail electricity to customers
throughout Kenya.
Energy and
Petroleum.
77. Kenya Railways
Corporation
(KRC)
The Kenya Railways
Corporation Act
(Cap. 397)
The Corporation is established under
section 3 of the Act. Its mandate is
to provide rail and inland waterways
transport.
Transport and
Infrastructure.

-- 147 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 149
[Subsidiary]
78. Kenya Seed
Company (KSC)
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
The Company is responsible for the
production and marketing of top
quality seeds. It also manages the
Government seed bank.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
79. National Social
Security Fund.
National Social
Security Fund Act
(Cap. 258)
The Fund is established under
section 3 of the Act to provide for
contributions to and the payment of
benefits out of the Fund.
Labour, and Social
Security Services.
80. National Oil
Corporation of
Kenya
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
It is charged with participation in all
aspects of the petroleum industry.
Energy and
Petroleum.
81. Numerical
Machining
Complex
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
It is charged with the commercial
production of steel, engineering
design, and development of
machinery and components.
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development.
82. Kenya Investment
Authority.
The Investment
Promotion Act (Cap.
485)
Its mandate is to advice the
government on ways to increase
investment and economic growth and
to promote co-operation between the
public and private sector.
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development.
83. Nyayo Tea Zones
Development
Corporation.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
Nyayo Tea Zones
Development
Corporation Order
[LN. 30/2002]
The Corporation is mandated to
promote forest conservation by
providing buffer zones of tea and
assorted tree species to check human
encroachment into forestland.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
84. Geothermal
Development
Company (GDC).
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
• Its mandate is to promote rapid
development of geothermal resources
in Kenya through surface exploration
and drilling for steam;
• to avail steam to power plant
developers for electricity generation;
to manage the geothermal reservoirs
to ensure constant supply of steam
for power generation; and
• to promote alternative uses of
geothermal resources other than
electricity generation.
Energy and
Petroleum.
SCHEDULE III
National Government Entities (Regulatory Agencies)
No. Agencies Enabling Legislation Mandate Sector
85. Central Bank of Kenya
(CBK).
The Constitution and
the Central Bank of
Kenya Act (Cap. 491)
Mandated under Article
231 of the Constitution
with, among others, the
formulation of monetary
policy, promotion of
price stability, issuance
of currency in addition to
other functions provided
for under the Act.
The National
Treasury.

-- 148 of 625 --

150 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
86. Agricultural, Fisheries and
Food Authority.
The Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food
Authority Act
(Cap. 317)
The Authority is generally
mandated with the
regulation and promotion
of agriculture in the
Country.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
87. Kenya Leather Development
Council.
The State Corporations
Act
(Cap. 446)
The Kenya Leather
Development Council
Order
[L.N. 114/2011]
The Council is charged
with the promotion,
direction, coordination
and harmonization of all
activities in the leather
subsector.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
88. National Bio-safety
Authority.
The Bio-safety Act (Cap.
320).
The Authority is
established under section
5 of the Act to exercise
general supervision and
control over the transfer,
handling and use of
genetically modified
organisms
(GMOs).
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
89. National Irrigation
Board.
The Irrigation Act.
(Cap. 347)
The Board is established
under section 3 of the
Act for the development,
control and improvement
of national irrigation
schemes in Kenya.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
90. Public Benefits
Organizations Regulatory
Authority.
The Public Benefits
Organizations Act, 2013.
(No. 18 of 2013)
The Authority is
established under
section 34 of the Act
to register public
benefit organizations,
maintain a register of
the organizations and
interpret the national
policy on public benefit
organizations so as to
assist in its smooth
implementation and
observance by government
ministries, departments
and agencies.
Devolution and
Planning.
91. Tourism Regulatory
Authority.
The Tourism Act (Cap.
381)
The Authority is
established under section
4 of the Act with mandate
to regulate the tourism
sector.
East African
Affairs,
Commerce and
Tourism.
92. Commission for University
Education
Universities Act (Cap.
210)
The Commission is
established under section
4 of the Act with mandate
for establishment,
accreditation and
governance of universities.
Education,
Science
and Technology.

-- 149 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 151
[Subsidiary]
93. National Commission
for Science Technology and
Innovation.
The Science, Technology
and Innovation Act (Cap.
511).
The National Commission
established under section
3 of the Act is mandated
to determine priorities in
science, technology and
innovation, give advice,
coordinate and promote
research, science and
technology activities for
Kenya’s development.
Education,
Science
and Technology.
94. Energy Regulatory
Commission.
The Energy Act
(Cap. 314)
The Commission is
established under section
4 of the Act to regulate the
energy sector.
Energy and
Petroleum.
95. Kenya Nuclear Electricity
Board.
The State Corporation
Act. (Cap. 446)
The Kenya Nuclear
Electricity Board Order
[L.N. 131/2012]
The Board mandated to
promote and expedite the
development of nuclear
electricity in Kenya.
Energy and
Petroleum.
96. National Environmental
Management Authority
(NEMA).
The Environmental
Management and
Coordination Act
(Cap. 387)
The Authority is
established under
section 7 of the Act with
mandate to exercise
general supervision and
co-ordination over all
matters relating to the
environment.
Environment,
Water and
Natural
Resources.
97. Kenya Medical Laboratory
Technicians and
Technologists Board.
The Medical Laboratory
Technicians and
Technologists Act (Cap.
253A)
The Board is established
under section 3 with
mandate to exercise
general supervision
and control over the
training, business, practice
and employment of
laboratory technicians and
technologists in Kenya and
to advise the Government
in related matters.
Health.
98. Anti-Counterfeit
Agency.
The Anti-Counterfeit
Act
(Cap. 510)
The Agency is established
under section 3 of the Act
with mandate to combat
trade in counterfeit goods.
Industrialization
and
Enterprise
Development.
99. Kenya Bureau of
Standard (KBS).
The Standards Act.
(Cap. 496)
It is established under
section 3 of the Act with
mandate to promote
the standardization
of the specification of
commodities, and codes of
practice.
Industrialization
and
Enterprise
Development.

-- 150 of 625 --

152 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
100. Kenya National
Accreditation Service.
The State Corporations
Act (Cap. 446)
The Kenya Accreditation
Service Order
[L.N. 55/2009]
The Kenya National
Accreditation Service
is established under
paragraph 3 of the Kenya
Accreditation Service
Order for the regulation
of accreditation of
conformity assessment
bodies.
Industrialization
and
Enterprise
Development.
101. Communications
Authority of Kenya
The Kenya Information
and Communications
Act.
(Cap. 411A)
The Authority is
established under the Act
to license and regulate
postal, information and
communication services in
Kenya.
Information,
Communication
and Technology.
102. National Authority
for the Campaign Against
Alcohol and Drug Abuse
The National Authority
for the Campaign
Against Alcohol and
Drug Abuse Act
(Cap. 122)
The Authority is
established under section
4 of the Act to control
alcohol and drug abuse.
Interior and
Coordination
of National
Government.
103. National Construction
Authority.
The National
Construction Authority
Act (Cap. 118)
The Authority is
established under section
3 of the Act to regulate
and coordinate the
construction industry for
sustainable social and
economic development.
Lands, Housing
and
Urban
Development.
104. Competition Authority The Competition Act
(Cap. 504)
The Authority is
established under
section 7 of the Act to
promote and safeguard
competition in the
national economy, and to
protect consumers from
unfair and misleading
market conduct.
The National
Treasury.
105. Public Procurement
Oversight Authority.
Public Procurement and
Disposal Act (Cap. 412C)
The Oversight Authority is
established under Section
8 of the Act to ensure
procurement procedures
are complied with as
established under the Act,
and
Regulations made
thereunder and monitor
the overall functioning of
the public procurement
system including
accountability and
documentation of the
procured items.
The National
Treasury.
106. Council for Legal
Education
The Legal Education Act
(Cap. 168)
The Council is established
under section 4 of the Act
with mandate to regulate
and license legal education
providers and any related
issues.
Office of the
Attorney-
General and
Department of
Justice.

-- 151 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 153
[Subsidiary]
107. Kenya Copyright
Board.
The Copyright Act (Cap.
130)
The Board is established
under section 3 of the Act
with mandate to oversee
provision for copyright
in literary, musical and
artistic works, audio-visual
works, sound recordings,
broadcasts and related
issues.
Office Of The
Attorney-
General and
Department Of
Justice.
108. Kenya Film
Classification Board.
Films and Stage Plays
Act. (Cap. 222)
The Board is established
under section 11 of the
Act to regulate and control
the making, possession,
exhibition and distribution
of cinematograph films,
for the licensing of stage
plays, theatres and
cinemas.
Sports, Culture
and the Arts.
109. Kenya Maritime Authority. State Corporations Act.
(Cap. 446)
Kenya Maritime
Authority Order
[L.N. 79/2004]
The Authority is
established under
paragraph 2 of the Order
with mandate to regulate,
co-ordinate and oversee
maritime affairs.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
110. National Transport
and Safety Authority.
The National Transport
and Safety Authority Act
(Cap. 404).
The Authority is
established under section
3 of the Act with mandate
to plan, manage and
regulate the road transport
system in Kenya.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
111. Export Processing
Zones Authority (EPZA).
The Export Processing
Zones Act (Cap. 517)
It is established under
section 3 of the Act with
mandate to promote
and facilitate the export
oriented investments
and the development of
enabling environment for
such investment.
Trade and
Industrialization.
112. Export Promotion
Council (EPC).
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
The Council’s mandate is
to develop and promote
Kenya’s exports trade.
Trade and
Industrialization.
113. Capital Markets Authority. The Capital Markets Act
(Cap. 485A)
It is established under
section 5(1) of the Act and
is mandated to promote,
regulate and facilitate the
development of an orderly,
fair and efficient capital
market in Kenya.
The National
Treasury.
114. Insurance Regulatory
Authority.
The Insurance Act
(Cap. 487)
It is established under
section 3 of the Act to
regulate the insurance
industry in Kenya.
The National
Treasury.

-- 152 of 625 --

154 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
115. Retirement Benefits
Authority.
The Retirement Benefits
Act (Cap. 197)
The Authority is
established under section
3 of the Act to regulate and
supervise management of
retirement
benefit schemes.
The National
Treasury.
116. Sacco Societies
Regulatory Authority.
The Sacco Societies Act
(Cap. 490B)
The Authority is
established under section
4 of the Act to license and
supervise Deposit Taking
Sacco Societies in Kenya.
The National
Treasury.
SCHEDULE 4
National Government Entities (Executive Agencies, Research Institutions, Public
Universities, Public Tertiary Education and Training Institutions, National Referral
Health Facilities, Boards and Commissions [Financed through the Exchequer], Fund
Management Corporations, any other Entity Established to Perform any other Public Functions
No. Agencies Enabling Legislation Mandate Sector
117. Agricultural
Development
Corporation.
The Agricultural
Development
Corporation Act.
(Cap. 444).
The Corporation is established
under section 3 of the Act and is
responsible for the promotion and
execution of agricultural schemes
and reconstruction in Kenya by
initiating, assisting or expansion of
agricultural undertaking in lands
and enterprises.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries
118. Brand Kenya Board. The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
Brand Kenya Board
Order
[L.N. 38/2008]
The Board is established under
paragraph 3 of the Order with
mandate to co-ordinate initiatives
for marketing the country in order
to maximize their efficiency, and
create and maintain the Kenya
brand to identify and distinguish
Kenyan products,
services and concepts.
East African
Affairs, Commerce
and Tourism.
119. Industrial
Development Bank.
The Companies Act
(Cap.486)
Established as a Development
Finance Institution (DFI) with
mandate to further the economic
development of Kenya by assisting
in establishment, expansion and
modernisation of medium and large
scale enterprises.
The National
Treasury.
120. Kenya Industrial
Estates (KIE).
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Established to address
indigenization of businesses,
capital formation, regional
dispersion of wealth, and
exploitation of local resources
through provision of industrial
sheds, subsidized credit and
improvement of entrepreneurial
skills to indigenous owned Micro,
Small and Medium industries
(MSMIs) with special focus on rural
industrial development.
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development.

-- 153 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 155
[Subsidiary]
121. Genetics Resource
Centre.
Kenya Agricultural
and Livestock Act
(Cap. 319)
The Centre is established under
section 31 of the Act to advise on
and develop appropriate systems to
promote balanced, diversified and
sustained agricultural development
and to optimise agricultural
production through adaptive and
investigative research.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries
122. Kenya Tsetse and
Trypanosomiasis
Eradication Council.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
Kenya Tsetse and
Trypanosomiasis
Eradication Council
Order
[L.N. 77/2012]
The Council is established
under paragraph 3 to advise the
Government on the policy on tsetse
and trypanosomiasis eradication in
Kenya and its implementation.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries
123. Kenya Veterinary
Vaccine Production
Institute.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
Kenya Veterinary
Vaccines Production
Institute Order
[L.N. 223/1990]
The Institute is established under
paragraph 2 of the Order to produce
safe, efficacious and affordable
veterinary vaccines through
undertaking research, providing
information,
marketing and distribution for
improvement of the livestock
industry.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
124. Kenya Dairy Board. The Dairy Industry
Act
(Cap. 336)
The Board is established under
section 4 of the Act and is
responsible for improvement and
control of the dairy industry and its
products.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
125. LAPSSET Corridor
Development
Authority.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The LAPSSET
Corridor
Development
Authority, Order
[L.N. 58/2013]
The Authority is established
under paragraph 3 of the Order to,
among others, plan, co-ordinate
and sequence LAPSSET Corridor
projects in collaboration with
Implementing ministries and
agencies.
Cabinet Affairs
Office/Transport
and
Infrastructure
126. Tourism Regulatory
Authority.
The Tourism
Act (Cap. 381)
The Authority is established under
section 4 of the Act to promote
and market Kenya as a tourist
destination both locally and
internationally.
Ministry of East
African Affairs,
Commerce and
Tourism.
127. Konza Technopolis
Authority.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
Konza Technopolis
Development
Authority Order [L.N.
23/2012]
The Authority is established under
paragraph 3 of the Order to plan,
develop, regulate and manage
Konza Techno City as a world class,
mixed use and sustainable city.
Information,
Communication
and
Technology.

-- 154 of 625 --

156 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
128. Small and Micro
Enterprises
Authority
The Micro and Small
Enterprises Act (Cap.
499C)
The Authority is established under
section 29 of the Act for promotion,
development, and regulation of
micro and small enterprises.
Trade and
Industrialization.
129. Kenya Ordinance
Factories
Corporation.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The Kenya
Ordinance Factories
Corporation Order
[L.N. 125/1997]
The Corporation is established
under paragraph 2 of the Order to
manufacture military hardware,
Machinery and Equipment.
Defence.
130. Drought
Management
Authority.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The National
Drought
Management
Authority Order
[L.N. 171/2011]
The Authority is established under
paragraph 3 of the Order to, on its
own or in association with other
authorities or persons, establish
mechanisms to ensure that drought
does not become famine and the
impacts of climate change are
sufficiently mitigated.
Devolution and
Planning.
131. Kenya National
Bureau of Statistics.
The Statistics Act
(Cap. 112)
The Bureau is established under
section 3 of the Act 4 as the
principal agency of the Government
for collecting, analysing and
disseminating statistical data in
Kenya and the custodian of official
statistical information.
Devolution and
Planning.
132. National Council
for Population and
Development.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The National Council
for Population and
Development Order
[L.N. 120/2004]
The Council is established under
paragraph 3 of the Order with
mandate to develop policies
relating to population and develop
population programs and assess
their impact.
Devolution and
Planning.
133. South -South CentreThe State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The South-South
Centre Order
[L.N. 120/2012]
The South-South Centre is
established under paragraph 3
to initiate, organize and manage
South-South activities and
projects in consultation with
the Government, civil society
organizations or private sector
institutions.
Devolution and
planning.
134. Higher Education
Loans Board.
The Higher Loans
Education Loans
Board Act
(Cap. 213A).
The Board is established under
section 3(1) of the Act and is
responsible for the management of
a Fund to be used for granting loans
to assist Kenyan students to obtain
higher education at recognized
institutions within and outside
Kenya.
Education, Science
and Technology.

-- 155 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 157
[Subsidiary]
135. Kenya Institute
of Curriculum
Development.
The Kenya Institute
of Curriculum
Development Act
(Cap. 112A)
The Institute is established under
section 3 of the Act with mandate
to advise the Government on
matters pertaining to curriculum
development, and implement the
policies relating to
curriculum development in basic
and tertiary education and training.
Education, Science
and Technology.
136. Kenya National
Commission for
UNESCO.
The Kenya National
Commission For
UNESCO Act
(Cap. 215)
The Commission is established
under section 3 with authority to
liaise with UNESCO and implement
UNESCO activities and budgeted
programs.
Education, Science
and Technology.
137. Kenya National
Examination
Council
(KNEC).
The Kenya National
Examinations
Council Act
(Cap. 214A).
The Council is established under
section 3(1) of the Act with
mandate to conduct examinations
at basic and tertiary levels.
Education, Science
and Technology.
138. Kenya Universities
and Colleges Central
Placement Service.
The Universities Act
(Cap. 210)
The Service is established under
section 55 of the Act with mandate
to uphold equity and balanced
access to University and College
education and develop suitable
criteria to promote
affirmative action, and other
strategies as may be approved the
by Government.
Education, Science
and Technology.
139. Technical and
Vocational
Education Training
Authority
The Technical And
Vocational Education
And Training Act
(Cap. 210A)
The Authority is established
under section 6 of the Act and
whose mandate is the governance
and management of institutions
offering technical and vocational
education and training and
to provide for coordinated
assessment, examination and
certification.
Education, Science
and Technology.
140. Rural Electrification
Authority.
The Energy Act
(Cap. 314)
The Authority is established under
section 66 of the Act
with the responsibility to accelerate
the pace of rural electrification in
order to promote sustainable socio-
economic development.
Energy and
Petroleum.
141. Athi Water Services
Board.
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
The Board is responsible for
efficient and economical provision
of water services within the Nairobi
and Athi Basin/Region
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
142. Coast Water
Services Board.
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
The Board is responsible for
efficient and economical provision
of water services within the Coast
Region.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.

-- 156 of 625 --

158 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
143. Kenya Forest
Service
The Forests Act, 2005
(No. 7 of 2005)
The Service is established under
section 4 of the Act for the
purposes of the establishment,
development and sustainable
management, including
conservation and rational
utilization, of forest resources for
the socio-economic development of
the country.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
144. Kenya Wildlife
Service (KWS)
The Wildlife
(Conservation and
Management) Act
(Cap. 376)
The Service is established under
section 6 of the Act for the
conservation, management and
utilization of all types of fauna (not
being domestic animals) and flora
in the Country.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
145. Lake Victoria North
Water Service
Board.
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
Established for provision of water
and sanitation services.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
146. Lake Victoria South
Water Service
Board.
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
Established for provision of water
and sanitation services.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
147. National Water
Conservation
and Pipeline
Corporation.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
National Water
Conservation and
Pipeline Corporation
Order, 1988.
[L.N. 270/1988]
Mandated for development of water
infrastructure and supply of water.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
148. Northern Water
Services Board.
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
Mandated to provide water and
sanitation services.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
149. Rift Valley Water
Services Board
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
Mandated to provide water and
sanitation services.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
150. Tana Water Services
Board.
The Water Act,
(Cap. 372)
Mandated to provide water and
sanitation services.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
151. Tanathi Water
Services Board.
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
Mandated to provide water and
sanitation services.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
152. Water Resources
Management
Authority.
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
The Authority is established under
section 7(1) of the Act to be the
lead agency in water resources
management.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
153. Water Services
Regulatory Board.
The Water Act
(Cap. 372)
The Board is established under
section 46(1) for the promotion
and regulation of water provision
services.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.

-- 157 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 159
[Subsidiary]
154. Coast Development
Authority.
The Coast
Development
Authority Act (Cap.
449).
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to plan and co-
ordinate the implementation of
development
projects in whole of the Coast
Province and the exclusive
economic zone.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
155. Ewaso Ng'iro North
Development
Authority
The Ewaso Ng'iro
North River Basin
Development
Authority Act (Cap.
448)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to plan and
co-ordinate the implementation
of development projects in the
Ewaso Ng'iro North River Basin and
catchment areas.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
156. Ewaso Ng'iro South
Development
Authority.
The Ewaso Ng'iro
South River Basin
Development
Authority Act (Cap.
447)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to plan and
co-ordinate the implementation
of development projects in the
Ewaso Ng'iro South River Basin and
catchment areas.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
157. Kerio Valley
Development
Authority.
The Kerio Valley
Development
Authority Act (Cap.
441)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to
maintain a liaison between the
institutions (KVDA), Government,
private sector and other agencies
on matters of development in the
area in view of limiting duplication
of activities and ensuring best use
of technical, financial, human and
natural resources.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
158. Lake Basin
Development
Authority.
The Lake Basin
Development
Authority Act (Cap.
442)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to carry out
integrated sustainable development
planning, implement development
programs and projects, coordinate
development programs and
activities, promote management
and conservation of natural
resources.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
159. Tana and Athi
Rivers Development
Authority.
The Tana and Athi
Rivers Development
Authority Act (Cap.
443).
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to plan and co-
ordinate the implementation of
development projects in the TRDA
areas.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources
160. Kenya Medical
Supplies Authority.
The Kenya Medical
Supplies Authority
Act
(Cap. 260).
The Agency is established under
section 3 of the Act with general
mandate to procure, warehouse
and distribute drugs and medical
supplies in the country.
Health.
161. Kenyatta National
Hospital.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The Kenyatta
National Hospital
Board Order
[L.N. 109/1987]
The Hospital’s mandate is to
provide specialized healthcare,
facilitate training and research
and participate in National Health
Planning and Policy for the benefit
of the nation and the region at
large.
Health.

-- 158 of 625 --

160 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
162. Moi Teaching and
Referral Hospital
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The Moi Teaching
and Referral Hospital
Order
[L.N. 78/1998]
It is responsible for provision of
quality healthcare, training and
research.
Health.
163. National Aids
Control Council.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446).
The National Aids
Control Council
Order, 1999
[L.N. 170/1999]
The Council is established under
paragraph 2 and is mandated to
coordinate stakeholders in the
multi-sectorial response to HIV and
AIDS in Kenya.
Health.
164. National Hospital
Insurance Fund.
The National
Hospital Insurance
Fund Act, 1998 (No. 9
of 1998)
The Fund is established under
section 3 of the Act with mandate
to provide health insurance to
Kenyans over the age of 18 years.
Health.
165. National Quality
Control Laboratory.
The Pharmacy and
Poisons Act (Cap.
244)
It is established to be used as a
facility for, among others,
examination and testing of drugs
and any material or substance from
or with which and the manner in
which drugs may be manufactured,
processed or treated and ensuring
the quality control of drugs and
medicinal substances.
Health.
166. Kenya Industrial
Property Institute.
The Industrial
Property Act, 2001
(No. 3 of 2001).
The Institute is established under
section 3 of the Act to, among
others, consider applications for
and grant industrial property
rights and provide to the public,
industrial property information
for technological and economic
development.
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development
167. Kenya Information
Communications
and Technology
Board.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The Kenya
Information
Communications and
Technology Board
Order
The Corporation is established
to advise the Government on all
relevant matters pertaining to
the development, co-ordination
and promotion of information
and communications technology
industries in the country.
Information,
Communication
and
Technology.
168. Kenya Yearbook
Editorial Board.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
The Kenya Yearbook
Order
[L.N. 187/2007]
The Board is established under
paragraph 3 of the Order
for facilitating Government
communication services through
the publication of the Kenya
Yearbook.
Information,
Communication
and Technology.

-- 159 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 161
[Subsidiary]
169. Kenya Citizens and
Foreign Nationals
Management
Service
The Kenya Citizens
and Foreign
Nationals
Management Service
Act (Cap. 171)
The Authority is established
under section 3 of the Act to
implement policies, laws and other
matters relating to immigration,
births, deaths, identification and
registration of persons including
issue of passports.
Interior and
Coordination
of National
Government.
170. National Council for
Persons with
Disabilities.
The Persons with
Disability Act
(Cap. 133)
The Council is established under
section 3 of the Act to formulate
and implement policies that are
geared towards mainstreaming
persons with disabilities in to the
national economy.
Labour and Social
Security Services.
171. National Industrial
Training
Authority.
The Industrial
Training Act (Cap.
237)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to, among
others, assess industrial training,
testing occupational skills and
awarding certificates including
Government trade test certificates.
Labour and Social
Security Services.
172. The National Social
Security
Assistance
Authority.
Social Assistance Act
(Cap. 258A)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to, among
others, identify and provide social
assistance to persons in need of
social assistance.
Labour, Social
Security and
Services
173. Kenya Deposit
Protection
Authority.
The Kenya Deposit
Insurance Act
(Cap. 487)
The Authority is established under
section 4 of the Kenya Deposit
Insurance Act (Cap. 487), to provide
a deposits insurance system and for
the receivership and liquidation of
deposit taking institutions.
The National
Treasury.
174. Financial Reporting
Centre.
The Proceeds of
Crime and Anti-
Money
Laundering Act
(Cap. 59A)
The Centre is established under
section 21 of the Act to assist in the
identification of the proceeds of
crime and the combating of money
laundering.
The National
Treasury.
175. Kenya Accountants
and Secretaries
National
Examination Board
(KASNEB)
The Accountants Act
(Cap. 531)
The Board is established under
section 14 of the Act to, among
other mandate, prepare syllabuses
for professionals’ and technicians’
examinations in accountancy and
company secretarial practice and
related disciplines.
The National
Treasury.
176. Kenya Institute of
Supplies
Examination Board.
The Supplies
Practitioners
Management Act
(Cap. 537)
The Board is established under
section 12 of the Act to, among
others, prescribe and regulate
syllabuses of instruction for
professional supplies certification
for persons seeking registration
under the Act.
The National
Treasury.
177. Kenya Revenue
Authority (KRA).
The Kenya Revenue
Authority Act (Cap.
469)
The Authority is established under
section 3 of the Act to, under
the general supervision of the
Cabinet Secretary for Finance, be
an agency of the Government for
the collection and receipt of all
revenues.
The National
Treasury.

-- 160 of 625 --

162 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
178. Kenya Trade
Network Agency
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
Kenya Trade Network
Agency Order
[L.N. 6/2011.]
The Agency is established under
paragraph 3 to implement,
operationalize and manage the
Kenya Electronic Single Window
System and to facilitate trade in
Kenya.
The National
Treasury.
179. Privatization
Commission.
The Privatization Act
(Cap. 485C)
The Commission is established
under section 3 of the Act to
formulate, manage, and implement
the Privatization Program.
The National
Treasury.
180. Unclaimed Financial
Assets
Authority.
The Unclaimed
Financial Assets Act
(Cap. 494)
The Commission is established
under section 39 of the Act with
mandate to administer unclaimed
financial assets.
The National
Treasury.
181. Kenya Law Reform
Commission
The Kenya Law
Reform Commission
Act
(Cap. 3)
The Commission is established
under section 4 of the Act with
powers to review all the law and
recommend its reform.
Office of the
Attorney-General
and Department Of
Justice.
182. National Council for
Law Reporting
The National Council
for Law Reporting
Act
(Cap. 19A)
The Council is established under
section 2 of the Act with mandate
to publish the Kenya Law Reports
and related publications and to
revise, consolidate and publish the
Laws of Kenya.
Office of the
Attorney-General
and Department of
Justice.
183. Kenya Academy of
Sports.
The Sports Act
(Cap. 223)
The Academy is established under
section 33 of the Act with mandate
to establish and manage sports
training academies in Kenya.
Sports, Culture and
the Arts.
184. National Museums
of Kenya.
The National
Museums and
Heritage Act
(Cap. 216)
It is established under section
3 of the Act to collect, preserve,
study, document and present
Kenya’s past and present
cultural and natural heritage
for the purposes of enhancing
knowledge, appreciation, respect
and sustainable utilization of
these resources for the benefit of
Kenya and the world, for now and
posterity.
Sports, Culture and
the Arts.
185. National Youth
Council.
The National Youth
Council Act
(Cap. 132)
The Council is established
under section 3 to, among other
functions, regulate and co-ordinate
activities and initiatives relating
to the youth being undertaken
by youth groups, youth focused
community-based organizations,
non-governmental organizations,
civil society movements and other
organizations.
Sports, Culture and
the Arts
186. Kenya National
Library Service
(KNLS).
The Kenya National
Library Services
Board Act (Cap. 225)
It is established under section 3 of
the Act to, among other functions,
promote, establish, equip, manage,
maintain and
develop libraries in Kenya as a
national library service.
Sports, Culture and
the Arts.

-- 161 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 163
[Subsidiary]
187. Sports Kenya. The Sports Act
(Cap. 223)
It is established under section 3 of
the Act and is responsible for the
establishment of sports institutions
and facilities.
Sports, Culture and
the Arts
188. Kenya Film
Commission.
The State
Corporations Act
(Cap. 446)
Kenya Film
Commission Order
[L.N. 10/2005]
It is established under section 3 of
the Act and is responsible for the
development, and promotion of the
film industry in Kenya.
Sports, Culture and
the Arts.
189. National Youth
Service.
The National Youth
Service Act. (Cap.
208)
It is established under section
3 of the Act with mandate to
train young citizens to serve the
Nation and the employment of
its members in tasks of national
importance.
Devolution and
Planning.
190. Kenya Ferry Services
Ltd (KFS).
The Companies Act
(Cap. 486)
Established and mandated to carry
on a ferry boat service.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
191. Kenya National
Highways Authority
(KeNHA).
The Kenya Roads Act
(Cap. 408)
The Authority is established
under section 3 of the Act for
Management, development,
rehabilitation and maintenance of
national roads.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
192. Kenya Roads Board
(KRB).
The Kenya Roads
Board Act (Cap.
408A)
The Board is established under
section 4 of the Act to oversee
the road network in Kenya and
coordinate the maintenance,
rehabilitation and development
funded by the Fund and to advise
the Cabinet Secretary on all
matters related thereto.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
193. Kenya Rural Roads
Authority.
The Kenya Roads Act
(Cap. 408)
The Authority is established
under section 6 of the Act and is
charged with the responsibility for
the management, development,
rehabilitation and maintenance of
rural roads.
Transport and
Infrastructure.
194. Kenya Institute of
Special Education.
The Basic Education
Act
(Cap. 211)
Education (Kenya
Institute Of Special
Education) Order
[L.N. 17/1986]
The Institute is established and
mandated to conduct teacher
training courses for teachers of
children with special needs and
disabilities.
Education, Science
and Technology.
SCHEDULE IV
Public Entities (Executive Agencies, Research Institutions, Public Universities, Public
Tertiary Education and Training Institutions, National Referral Health Facilities,
Boards and Commissions [Financed Through the Exchequer], Fund Management
Corporations, any other Entity Established to Perform any other Public Functions

-- 162 of 625 --

164 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
No. National
Government
Entities
Enabling
Legislation
Mandate Parent Ministry
(Sector)
195. Bukura
Agricultural
College.
The Bukura
Agricultural
College Act, 1999.
(No. 5 of 1999).
The College is established under section
3 of the Act to provide education in
agriculture and other auxiliary subjects.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
196. Kenya
Agricultural
and Livestock
Research
Organization.
The Kenya
Agricultural and
Livestock Act
(Cap. 319)
It is established under section 3 of the
Act to undertake research in agriculture
and allied areas.
Agriculture,
Livestock
andFisheries.
197. Fisheries and
Marine Research
Institute.
The Kenya
Agricultural and
Livestock Act
(Cap. 319)
Established under section 31 of
the Act to advise on and develop
appropriate systems to promote
balanced, diversified and sustained
agricultural development and to
optimise agricultural production
through adaptive and investigative
research.
Agriculture,
Livestock and
Fisheries.
198. Kenya School
of Government.
The Kenya School
of Government
Act, 2012 . (No. 9
of 2012).
The School is established under section
3 to provide learning and development
programmes to build capacity for the
Public Service.
Devolution and
Planning.
199. Kenya Institute
of Public Policy
Research
and Analysis
(KIPPRA).
Kenya Institute
for The Public
Policy Research
and Analysis Act,
2006.
(No. 15 of 2006)
The Institute is established under
section 3 of the Act with mandate to
develop capacities in public policy,
research and analysis and to assist the
government in the process of policy
formulation and implementation.
Devolution and
Planning.
200. Kenya Utalii
College (KUC)
The Tourism Act,
2011 (No. 28 of
2011)
The College is established under
section 17 of the Act with mandate in
training qualified professionals for the
hospitality and tourism industry and
capacity building in the tourism sector.
East African Affairs,
Commerce and
Tourism.
201. Tourism Research
Institute.
The Tourism Act
(Cap. 381)
The Institute is established under
section 51 of the Act with mandate to
undertake and co-ordinate tourism
research and analysis in accordance
with the provisions of the Act.
East African Affairs,
Commerce and
Tourism.
202. Chuka University The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Chuka
University College
Order, 2007.
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education, Science
and Technology
203. Cooperative
University
College
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Co-operative
University College
Order, 2011.
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education, Science
and Technology

-- 163 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 165
[Subsidiary]
204. Dedan Kimathi
University
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210) The
Kimathi
University College
of Technology
Order, 2007.
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
205. Egerton
University
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
206. Embu University
College.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
207. Garissa
University
College
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
208. Jaramogi Oginga
Odinga University
of Science and
Technology.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Bondo
University College
Order, 2009
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
209. Jomo Kenyatta
University of
Agriculture And
Technology
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
210. Karatina
University
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Karatina
University College
Order, 2009
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
211. Kenya Multi-
Media University
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Multimedia
University College
of Kenya Order,
2008.
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
212. Kenyatta
University
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education, Science
and Technology.
213. Kibabii University
College.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
214. Kirinyaga
University
College
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
215. Kisii University The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Kisii
University College
Order, 2007
Established
to provide and advance university
education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.

-- 164 of 625 --

166 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
216. Laikipia
University.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Laikipia
University College
Order, 2009.
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
217. Maasai Mara
University.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Narok
University College
Order, 2008.
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology
218. Machakos
University
College
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science
andTechnology
219. Maseno
University
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
220. Masinde Muliro
University of
Science and
Technology.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
221. Meru University
of Science and
Technology
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Meru
University College
of Science and
Technology Order,

Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
222. Moi University The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
223. Murang’a
University
College
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
224. Pwani University The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Pwani
University College
Order, 2007
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
225. Rongo University
College
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology
226. South Eastern
Kenya University
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Eastern
University College
Order, 2008.
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
227. TaitaTaveta
University
College
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology

-- 165 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 167
[Subsidiary]
228. Technical
University of
Mombasa.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology
229. The Technical
University of
Kenya.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Kenya
Polytechnic
University College
Order, 2007
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology
230. University of
Eldoret
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
231. University of
Kabianga.
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
The Kabianga
University College
Order, 2009.
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
232. University of
Nairobi
The Universities
Act (Cap. 210)
Established to provide and advance
university education and training.
Education,
Science and
Technology.
233. Kenya Water
Institute.
The Kenya Water
Institute Act,
2001.
(No.1 of 2001)
Established under section 3 of the Act
to provide, directly or in collaboration
with other institutions of higher
learning, services in human resource
development, consultancy, research and
development in the water sector.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
234. Forest and
Environment
Research
Institute.
The Kenya
Agricultural and
Livestock Act
(Cap. 319)
Established under section 31 of
the Act to advise on and develop
appropriate systems to promote
balanced, diversified and sustained
agricultural development and to
optimise agricultural production
through adaptive and investigative
research.
Environment,
Water and Natural
Resources.
235. Kenya Medical
Training College
(KMTC).
Kenya Medical
Training College
Act, (Cap. 261)
The College is established in section
3 of the Act with mandate to provide
training and consultancy in the health
sector and related areas.
Health.
236. Kenya Medical
Research
Institute
(KEMRI).
The Science,
Technology and
Innovation Act
(Cap. 511).
(No. 28 of 2013)
Mandated to conduct medical research. Health.
237. Kenya Industrial
Research and
Development
Institute.
The Science,
Technology and
Innovation Act
(Cap. 511).
Mandated to carry out research in the
fields of Civil Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, Textile Technology,
Electrical Engineering, Mining, Power
Resources, Chemical Engineering,
Indus trial Chemistry, Food Technology,
Ceramics and Clay Technology.
Industrialization
and Enterprise
Development.

-- 166 of 625 --

168 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
238. Kenya Institute
of Mass
Communication.
State Corporations
Act, (Cap. 446).
Kenya Institute
of Mass
Communication
Order (L.N.
197/2011)
The Institute is established under
paragraph 3 of the Order for training in
communication and the cinematic-arts.
Information,
Communication
and Technology.
239. Kenya School of
Law
The Kenya School
of Law Act (Cap.
16C)
The School is established under
section 3 of the Act being a public legal
education provider responsible for the
provision of professional legal training
as an agent of the Government.
Office of the
Attorney-General
and Department of
Justice
240. Kisumu
Polytechnic
The Technical
and Vocational
Education and
Training Act, 2013.
(No. 29 of 2013).
Established to provide for technical and
vocational training.
Education, Science
and Technology.
241. National Crime
Research Centre
The National
Crime Research
Act (Cap. 62)
Established to carry out research into
causes of crime and its prevention
and to disseminate research findings
and recommendations to agencies
of Government concerned with
administration of criminal justice with a
view to assisting them with their policy
formulation and planning.
Office of the
Director of Public
Prosecutions.
SCHEDULE V
No. Public Funds (Within the Administration of A State
Department or any other National Government Entity)
242.Youth
Enterprises
Development
Fund.
The State Corporations
Act (Cap. 446)
Youth Enterprise
Development Fund
Order
[L.N. 63/2007]
Established to, among others, provide
funding and business development
services to youth owned or youth
focused enterprises.
Devolution
and Planning.
243.Constituency
Development
Fund.
The Constituencies
Development Fund Act
(Cap. 414)
Established by the Act to ensure that a
specific portion of the national annual
budget is devoted to the constituencies
for purposes of infrastructural
development, wealth creation and
in the fight against poverty at the
constituency level.
Devolution
and Planning

-- 167 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 169
[Subsidiary]
244.Water Services
Trust Fund
The Water Act.
(Cap. 372)
The Fund is mandated to provide
financial support for improved access
to water and sanitation in areas
without adequate services including
supporting capacity building activities
and initiatives that aim at enabling
communities to plan, implement,
manage, operate and sustain water
services-by creating awareness and
disseminating information regarding
community management of water
services, and encouraging their active
participation in implementation and
management.
Environment,
Water and
Natural Resources
245.Local
Authorities
Provident Fund.
Local Authorities
Provident Fund Act
(Cap. 272)
Established under section 4 of the
Act to provide pension fund certain
employees of Local Authorities.
Devolution
and Planning.
246.Policy Holders
Compensation
Fund.
Insurance Act (Cap. 487)
The Insurance
(Policyholders
Compensation Fund)
Regulations, 2010.
Established to protect policy holders
of an insolvent insurance company by
providing them with compensation for
unsettled claims.
The National
Treasury
247. Women
Enterprise
Fund.
The Public Finance
Management Act (Cap.
412A)
The Government
Financial Management
(Women Enterprise
Fund) Regulations.
The Fund is established under
regulation 3 to provide loans to
individual women and groups for
expansion and growth of Small and
Medium enterprises.
Devolution
and Planning.
248.Micro
and Small
Development
Fund.
The Micro and Small
Enterprises Act (Cap.
499C)
The Fund is established under section
51 to finance the promotion and
development of small and micro
enterprises.
The National
Treasury.
249.Local
Government
Loans
Authority.
Local Government
Loans Act (Cap. 270)
The Authority is established under
section 3 to facilitate borrowing by
Local Government Authorities of
money for Capital Development.
Devolution
and Planning.
250.Local Authority
Transfer Fund.
Local Authority Transfer
Fund Act, 1998 (No. 8 of
1998)
The Fund is established under section
3 of the Act to act as a finance base
in funding various Local Authorities
expenses.
251.Consolidated
Fund.
The Constitution. The Consolidated Fund is established
under Article 206 of the Constitution
into which is
deposited all moneys raised or received
on behalf of national government.
The National
Treasury.
252.Civil
Contingencies
Fund
The Constitution. The Fund is established under Article
208 to carter for urgent and unforeseen
need for expenditure which were not
budgeted for.
The National
Treasury.
253.Judiciary Fund. The Constitution. The Fund is established under Article
173 of the Constitution to provide
funds to be used
for administrative expenses of the
Judiciary.
Judiciary.

-- 168 of 625 --

170 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
254.Equalization
Fund.
The Constitution The Fund is established under Article
204 of the Constitution into which is
deposit one half percent of all revenues
collected by nation government each
year.
The National
Treasury.
255.Treasury Main
Clearance
Fund.
The National Treasury
circular under the
Exchequer and Audit
Act.
(Cap. 412)
The Fund is established to facilitate
overseas payments in foreign current
in respect of government imports and
pension payments through Crown
Agents in United
Kingdom.
The National
Treasury.
256.Contractors
and Builders
Retention Fund
The National Treasury
circular.
The Fund is established for payment
of retention fee for contractors and
builders
The National
Treasury.
257. Government
Clearance
Agency Fund
The National Treasury
circular.
To facilitate clearing and forwarding of
import goods coming into the Country.
The National
Treasury.
258.Rural
Development
Fund
The Exchequer and
Audit Act (Cap. 412)
To finance rural development (the fund
is dormant)
The National
Treasury.
259.The Provident
Fund
The Provident Fund
Pension Act.
(Cap. 191)
Established under section 3 to provide
terminal benefits to government
employees who were not covered under
the Pension Act (Cap. 189).
The National
Treasury.
260.The Asiatic
Widows and
Orphans
Pension Fund.
The Asiatic Widows and
Orphans Pension Act.
(Cap. 193).
The Fund is established to provide
pensions funds for Asian widows and
Children of the deceased Asian officers
who worked for Government.
The National
Treasury.
261.Asian Officers
Family Pension
Fund.
The Asian Officers
Family Pension Act.
(Cap.194)
The Fund is established under section
5 to provide pensions funds for
Asian widows and Children of the
deceased Asian officers who worked for
Government.
The National
Treasury.
262.European
Widows and
Orphans
Pension Fund.
The Widows and
Orphans Pension Act
192 of 1921.
To provide pensions funds for European
widows and Children of the deceased
European officers who were working for
Government.
The National
Treasury.
263.District Cash
Fund.
Established through
Treasury Circular
no 7/2001 under the
Exchequer and Audit
Act.
(Cap. 412).
To provide float for the Ministries
and departments operating through
the District Treasuries. (the fund is
dormant)
The National
Treasury
264.Pre-shipment
Inspection
Fund.
The is established to facilitate pre-
shipment inspection transactions for
imported goods and services at the
point of entry (the fund is dormant)
The National
Treasury
265.Civil Servants
Accident Claim,
Fund
Directorate of Personnel
Management Circular of

Established to carter for compensation
to deceased and injured civil servants
in the course of duty.
The National
Treasury
266.Alcoholic Drink
Control Fund.
The Alcoholic Drink
Control Act, 2010.
(No. 4 of 2010)
Provide regulations of the production
sale and consumption of alcoholic.
NACADA

-- 169 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 171
[Subsidiary]
267. Higher
Education Loan
Fund.
The Higher Education
Loans Board Act. (No. 6
of 2006).
Established under section 11 for the
purposes of granting loans to assist
Kenyan students to pursue higher
education.
Education,
science and
Technology.
268.Provincial
Administration
Cash Fund.
Established through
Treasury Circular under
the Exchequer and Audit
Act. (Cap. 412)
To provide float for the Ministries
and departments operating through
the District Treasuries. (the fund is
dormant)
The National
Treasury.
269.Government
Press Fund
The Exchequer and
Audit Act (Cap. 412)
The Exchequer and
Audit (Government
Press Fund)
Regulations, 1988
To procure supplies of raw material for
undertaking production by government
printer of various printing and
publishing works obtainable from
government press.
The Office of the
President.
270.Prisons
Industries
Fund.
The Exchequer and
Audit Act (Cap. 412)
The Exchequer and
Audit Prison Industries
Fund Fund) Regulations,
1988.
The Fund is mandated to train and
rehabilitate prisoners and inmates and
procure necessary raw materials, tools,
plants and equipment required thereof,
and offer for sale finished products in
the open market.
Department of
Prison.
271.Prisons Farms
Revolving Fund
Exchequer and Audit
Act (Cap. 412)
The Exchequer and
Audit (Prison Farms
Revolving Fund)
Regulations 1993.
To provide funds required for
development and running of prison
farms for training and rehabilitation of
prisoners and inmates.
Department of
Prison.
272.Housing Fund The Housing Act.
(Cap. 117)
Established under section 6 of the Act
for construction of dwellings within the
area of approved schemes.
National Housing
Corporation.
273.Demonstration
Farms Fund
The Exchequer and
Audit Act Cap 412
The Exchequer and
Audit (Demonstration
Farms Fund)
Regulations, 1990
Established to provide requirements
for development and running of
demonstration farms at farmers
training centres.
Agriculture
274.Agricultural
Information
Resource
Centre
Revolving
Fund.
The Exchequer and
Audit Act. (Cap. 412)
The Exchequer and
Audit (Agricultural
Information Resource
Centre Revolving Fund)
Regulations 1993.
Established to provide for development
of Agricultural information centres to
meet the
demand for agricultural training and
media materials within and outside the
Ministry of Agriculture.
Agriculture.
275.Medical
Supplies Fund.
The Exchequer and
Audit Act. (Cap.412).
The Exchequer and
Audit (Medical Supplies
Fund) Regulations, 1987
[L.N. 11/1987]
Established to finance Medical Supplies
in the Country.
Health.

-- 170 of 625 --

172 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
276.Veterinary
Services
Development
Fund.
The Exchequer and
Audit Act. (Cap. 412)
The Exchequer And
Audit (Veterinary
Services Development
Fund) Regulations, 1996
[L.N. 109/1996]
To provide for the development and
delivery of veterinary services.
Livestock
Development
277. Management
Supervisions
and Liquidation
Fund.
The Cooperative
Societies Act. (Cap.
490).
The Co-operative
Societies Rules, 1998
[L.N. 157/1998]
Established under rule 16 of the
Societies Rules for management
and supervisions and liquidation of
Cooperative Societies.
Co-operatives.
278.Petroleum
Development
Levy Fund.
The Petroleum
Development Levy Fund
Act, 1991 (No. 4 of 1991)
The Fund is established to finance
programmes necessary to supplement
fuel distribution in areas inadequately
served by oil marketing Companies and
for development of Petroleum Industry.
Energy.
279.Training
Fund
Petroleum Act (Cap.308)
Petroleum (Exploration
and Production)
(Training Fund)
Regulations
[L.N. 132/2006]
Established under regulation 3 to
finance the training of Kenyans in
petroleum operations.
Energy.
280.Kenya Energy
Sector
Environment
and Social
Responsibility
Programme
Fund.
Petroleum Act (Cap.
308)
For energy sector environment and
social responsibility programme.
Energy.
281.Car Loan
Scheme for
Electoral
Commissioners
Fund
The Public Finance
Management Act
(Cap. 412A)
The Government
Financial Management
(Members and Staff
Of The Electoral
Commission Car
Loan Scheme Fund)
Regulations, 2007.
Funds for car loans for Interim
Independent Electoral Commissioners.
Electoral
Commission.
282.Political Parties
Fund
Political Parties Act,
2011.
(No. 11 of 2011).
The Fund is established under section
23 of the Act to promote representation
in Parliament and County Assembly.
Electoral
Commission.
283.Strategic Grain
Reserve Trust
Fund.
Exchequer and Audit
Act.
(Cap.412)
To finance strategic grain reserves. Agriculture.
284.Humanitarian
Fund.
For disaster management. Devolution
and Planning.
285.FAZA Fire
disaster Fund.
For disaster management. Devolution
and Planning.

-- 171 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 173
[Subsidiary]
286.Nakumatt/
Molo Fire
Victims Fund.
For disaster management for Nakumatt
and Molo fire victims
Devolution
and Planning.
287. Township,
Roads and
drainage Fund.
For maintenance of township roads and
drainage.
Lands
288.Civil Servants
Housing
Scheme Fund.
The Housing Act.
(Cap. 117)
The Civil Servants
(Housing Scheme Fund)
Regulations, 2004
[L.N. 98/2004.]
To finance Civil servants housing
scheme
Housing
289.Kenya Slums
Upgrade,
low cost
housing and
infrastructure
Trust Fund
To finance slums upgrade Housing
290.Intelligence
Service
Development
Fund.
The Exchequer and
Audit Act. (Cap. 412)
To facilitate the operations of the
Intelligence Service
National
Intelligence
Service.
291.Stores and
Services Fund-
Supplies
Branch Fund
Account.
The Exchequer and
Audit Act. (Cap. 412)
To procure goods and services centrally
for the Government.
Works
292.Universal
Service Fund.
The Kenya Information
and communication Act.
(Cap. 411)
To support widespread access to
capacity building and promote
innovation in information and
communication technology service.
Communication
Authority of
Kenya.
293.Rehabilitation
Fund.
The Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substance
Control Act.
(Cap. 245)
Control of the possession of trafficking
narcotic drugs and Psychotropic
substances.
Health.
294.Reserve Fund. For making good any loss or deficiency
which may occur in the course of
business of the Corporation.
Housing
295.Pension Trust
Fund
Pension Trust Fund Act
No 17 of 1977
Sets out the obligations for the two
governments of Kenya and the United
Kingdom relating to the British citizens
who served in Kenya.
The National
Treasury.
296.Compensation
Fund
Prevention of Fraud
(Investment) Act. Cap 1

To provide cushion investor against
loss of their investment.
Office of Director
of Public
Prosecutions.
297. Community
Development
Trust Fund
CDTF is established
under Legal Notice No.
303 dated 26th March

The mandate is to contribute to
poverty reduction efforts in Kenya
by offering support, in the form of
grants, to community-based projects
which address social, economic and
environmental priorities
Ministry of
Devolution and
Planning

-- 172 of 625 --

174 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
298.Humanitarian
Fund
The Prevention,
Protection and
Assistance to Internally
Displaced Persons and
Affected Communities
Act, 2012
The mandate of the Fund is to
provide for the capital and recurrent
expenditure relating to the protection
and assistance to internally displaced
persons and the provision of a durable
solution to them
Ministry of
Devolution and
Planning.
299.Local Authority
Provident Fund
Cap 272
Local Authorities
Provident Fund Act
(Cap.272)
To provide for contributions to the fund
by such employees of local authorities
in Kenya,
300.Deposit
Protection
Fund
Banking Act (Cap. 488) To provide cover for depositors and
act as a liquidator of failed member
institutions.
Central Bank of
Kenya
301.Parliamentary
Mortgage
(Members
Scheme Fund)
Public Finance
Management Act (Cap.
412A) and Legal Notice
No. 67.
To finance mortgage for Members of
Parliament
Parliament.
302.Parliamentary
Mortgage (Staff
Scheme Fund)
Public Finance
Management Act (Cap.
412A) and Legal Notice
No. 67.
To finance mortgage for Staff of
Parliament
Parliament.
303.Parliamentary
Car Loan
(Members
Scheme Fund
Public Finance
Management Act (Cap.
412A) and Legal Notice
No. 67.
To finance car loans for Members of
Parliament
Parliament.
304.Parliamentary
Car Loan (Staff
Scheme Fund
Public Finance
Management Act (Cap.
412A) and Legal Notice
No. 67.
To finance car loans for Staff of
Parliament
Parliament.

-- 173 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 175
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 24
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (SENATE
MONITORING AND EVALUATION) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Purpose.
3. Interpretation.
4. Application.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
5. Establishment of the Fund.
6. Sources of the Fund.
7. Objects of the Fund.
8. Initial allocation.
9. Allocation of the Fund.
PART III – ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND
10. Administration of the Fund.
11. Functions of the Administrator.
PART IV – ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMITTEE
12. Establishment of the Senate Monitoring and Evaluation Committee.
13. The Accounting Officer.
14. Functions of the Committee.
PART V – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
15. Receipts and earnings to be retained.
16. Accounts and records.
17. Financial statements.
18. Report on operations of Fund.
19. Procurement services.
20. Opening a bank account.
21. Source of finance.
22. Signatories of cheques.
PART VI – OFFICES AND STAFFING FOR
PURPOSES OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION
23. Monitoring and Evaluation offices.
24. Monitoring and Evaluation staff.
25. Terms of service.
26. County monitoring and evaluation office manager.
27. Monitoring and evaluation officer.
PART VII – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
28. Transition.
29. Accounting for Commission property.

-- 174 of 625 --

176 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
30. Winding up of the Fund.
31. Vesting of assets.
FIRST
SCHEDULE
— CONDITIONS FOR DISBURSEMENT
SECOND
SCHEDULE
— FORMULA FOR ALLOCATING MONIES AMONG THE ELECTED
SENATORS

-- 175 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 177
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (SENATE
MONITORING AND EVALUATION) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 71/2018]
PART I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Senate Monitoring
and Evaluation) Regulations.
Purpose.
2. (1) The purpose of the regulations is to guide the Senate Sessional Committee on
Monitoring and Evaluation in the administration, disbursement and management of the Fund
to ensure efficiency and effectiveness.
(2) The regulations—
(a) specify the sources of monies to the Fund;
(b) provide guidance on the administration and management of the Fund; and
(c) provide the financial procedures for the Fund.
Interpretation.
3. In these Regulations—
"Accounting Officer" means the Clerk of the Senate;
"Administrator" means a person appointed under regulation 10 (2);
"bank account" means an account opened at a commercial bank for the purpose of
Monitoring and Evaluation under these Regulations;
"Clerk" means the Clerk of the Senate appointed under Article 128 of the Constitution;
"Commission" means the Parliamentary Service Commission established under Article 127
of the Constitution;
"Committee" means the Senate Monitoring and Evaluation Committee established under
regulation 12;
"county monitoring and evaluation office manager" means the monitoring and evaluation
manager appointed or designated as such for purposes of the Fund;
"county" means a county as prescribed under Article 6 (1) of the Constitution;
"Fund" means the sum allocated to Senators for purposes of carrying out monitoring and
evaluation under the Commission's budget;
"monitoring and evaluation officer" means an officer appointed or designated to advise on
technical issues related to the management of the Fund;
"recipient" means a nominated or elected Senator who receives monies from the Fund;
"returns" means documentation indicating expenditure incurred during the monitoring
and evaluation exercise;
"Speaker" means the Speaker of the Senate;
"staff" means an employee or employees of a Senator under these regulations.

-- 176 of 625 --

178 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Application.
4. (1) These Regulations shall apply to recipients of funds, the Committee established
under Regulation 12 and employees of the Commission involved in the management and
administration of the Fund.
(2) The application of these regulations shall be guided by Article 96 of the Constitution
which requires the Senate to oversight county governments and protect their interests.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Fund.
5. (1) There is established a Fund, the Senate Monitoring and Evaluation Fund.
(2) The Fund shall be utilized to carry out monitoring and evaluation activities in exercise
of the Senate's oversight function over county governments.
Sources of the Fund.
6. The Fund shall consist of—
(a) monies appropriated under the Commission's Budget for monitoring, evaluation
and impact assessment;
(b) grants and donations to the Fund received through the Commission; and
(c) any other lawful sources.
Objects of the Fund.
7. (1) The object of the Fund is to facilitate a Senator to carry out monitoring and
evaluation activities in exercise of the Senate's oversight role over county governments in
accordance with Article 96 of the Constitution.
(2) Without prejudice to subparagraph (1), the Fund shall be utilized in—
(a) undertaking county expenditure tracking surveys;
(b) promoting citizen engagement on issues affecting the counties by undertaking
civic education and community sensitization;
(c) initiating a partnership approach with stakeholders at the county level to ensure a
strong and more strategic focus on community development;
(d) undertaking research, studies and surveys on various thematic areas affecting
counties;
(e) undertaking social auditing of development projects being undertaken in the
counties;
(f) tracking and monitoring development activities in the counties; and
(g) any other monitoring and evaluation activity relevant to the Senator's mandate.
(3) A nominated Senator shall carry out the monitoring and evaluation activities in sub
paragraph (2) at the national level in respect of the interest that the Senator represents in
the Senate.
(4) Despite sub paragraph (3), a nominated Senator may perform the following functions
in the utilization of the Fund—
(a) evaluate programmes that promote and protect the full enjoyment of human rights
of women, youth and persons with disabilities by involving them in decision-
making processes in all policies and programmes; and

-- 177 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 179
[Subsidiary]
(b) initiate and maintain effective public awareness campaigns designed to promote
greater social awareness towards women, youth and persons with disabilities.
Initial allocation.
8. The minimum allocation to the Fund shall be one billion shillings provided under the
Commission's budget for every financial year, provided that the allocation shall be reviewed
upwards from time to time.
Allocation of the Fund.
9. The allocation to the Fund shall be utilized as follows—
(a) a one percent (1%) administration fee shall be charged on the total fund allocated
and shall be retained by the Commission for purposes of facilitating administrative
functions of the Fund;
(b) a one percent (1%) of the total fund allocation shall be set aside by the Commission
for capacity building of the Senators and their staff;
(c) a six percent (6%) of the total fund allocated shall be set aside for the nominated
Senators and this amount shall be divided equally among the nominated Senators;
and
(d) the balance shall be shared among the elected Senators according to the formula
provided for in Second Schedule of these regulations.
PART III – ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND
Administration of the Fund.
10. (1) The Fund shall be administered through the Senate Monitoring and Evaluation
Office established by the Commission.
(2) The Accounting Officer shall in writing, appoint an employee of the Commission as
the Administrator of the Fund.
Functions of the Administrator.
11. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) consult with the Accounting Officer and the Committee on matters relating to the
administration of the Fund;
(b) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records in relation
to the Fund, of all activities and undertakings financed by the Fund;
(c) consolidate the required reports under these regulations and submit them to the
Committee; and
(d) carry out any other duties assigned by the Accounting Officer.
(2) The Administrator may in writing, delegate to an employee of the Commission to
exercise any of the administrator's powers or the performance of any of the functions under
these regulations.
(3) The Accounting Officer shall ensure that the Senate Monitoring and Evaluation Office
is resourced with requisite personnel for purposes of the day to day operations and handling
of matters related to the management of the Fund.
(4) The Accounting Officer shall open, maintain and manage a separate account with a
reputable bank where the monies due to the Fund shall be kept.
(5) The disbursement of monies out of the Fund to the recipients shall be bi-annual.

-- 178 of 625 --

180 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(6) The Accounting Officer shall with the approval of the Committee established under
Regulation 12, introduce additional administrative measures from time to time for effective
operation of the Fund.
PART IV – ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMITTEE
Establishment of the Senate Monitoring and Evaluation Committee.
12. The Senate shall in accordance with its Standing Orders, establish a Committee known
as the Senate Monitoring and Evaluation Committee consisting of a Chairperson and not more
than eight other members to oversight the kitty.
The Accounting Officer.
13. The Accounting Officer or the Accounting Officer's representative shall be the
secretary to the Committee.
Functions of the Committee.
14. (1) The Committee shall—
(a) consider the bi-annual disbursements out of the Fund;
(b) receive reports on the performance of the Fund from the Administrator;
(c) examine the monitoring programmes being undertaken by the recipients of the
Fund;
(d) prepare and submit an annual report on the operations and performance of the
Fund to the Senate; and
(e) perform any other function as the Senate may approve.
(2) The business and the affairs of the Committee shall be conducted in accordance with
the Senate Standing Orders.
PART V – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Receipts and earnings to be retained.
15. The receipts, earnings, and accruals to the Fund and the balance of the Fund at the
close of each financial year, shall be retained by the Fund for use for the purpose for which
the Fund is established,
Accounts and records.
16. The Accounting Officer shall cause to be kept all proper books and records of accounts
of the income, expenditure and liabilities associated with the Fund.
Financial statements.
17. Within a period of three months after the end of each financial year, the Accounting
Officer shall submit to the Commission the accounts of the Fund showing—
(a) a statement of income and expenditure during that year; and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Fund on the last day of the financial
year.
Report on operations of Fund.
18. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall within two months after the end of each
financial year, prepare and submit to the Accounting Officer a report of the operations of the
Fund for the preceding year.

-- 179 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 181
[Subsidiary]
(2) The Accounting Officer shall submit the report under sub paragraph (1) to the
Committee for information.
Procurement services.
19. Procurement works and services relating to activities under these regulations shall be
governed by the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act (Cap. 412C).
Opening a bank account.
20. An account approved by the Commission shall be opened with a reputable commercial
bank at the nearest location from the county office.
Source of finance.
21. At the commencement of every financial year, the county monitoring and evaluation
office manager shall be issued with an Authority to Incur Expenditure by the Clerk in that
financial year.
Signatories of cheques.
22. The signatories to the account opened pursuant to regulation 20 shall be—
(a) the county monitoring and evaluation office manager whose signature shall be
mandatory; and
(b) two other signatories appointed by the Senator for that purpose.
PART VI – OFFICES AND STAFFING FOR
PURPOSES OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Monitoring and Evaluation offices.
23. A Senator shall utilize existing structures in the County Office for purposes of
administrative activities in undertaking monitoring and evaluation.
Monitoring and Evaluation staff.
24. (1) A Senator shall recruit for purposes of monitoring and evaluation the following
staff to serve in the county office—
(a) the county monitoring and evaluation office manager; and
(b) the monitoring and evaluation officer.
(2) A Senator may recruit additional staff as may be necessary but subject to the ceiling
of staff salaries approved by the Commission.
Terms of service.
25. (1) A member of staff recruited under regulation 24 shall—
(a) not hold any position in a political party; and
(b) sign a contract of employment which shall be submitted to the Clerk.
(2) A member of staff may at any time give one month's notice before resignation from
employment or surrender one month's salary in lieu of notice.
County monitoring and evaluation office manager.
26. The county monitoring and evaluation office manager shall—
(a) be the officer in charge of the administrative and institutional management of the
finances allocated for monitoring and evaluation;

-- 180 of 625 --

182 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) avail to the Clerk bi-annually, copies of bank statements and any other financial
records from the Senator's allocation;
(c) make purchases as may be necessary to effectively enable monitoring and
evaluation;
(d) ensure that the money available is spent in conformity with existing government
financial regulations to facilitate quick, efficient and effective delivery of services;
(e) in writing, keep the Senator informed about the transactions of the monitoring and
evaluation bank account; and
(f) perform any other duties as may be assigned by the Senator from time to time.
Monitoring and evaluation officer.
27. The monitoring and evaluation officer shall—
(a) implement monitor and evaluate programs in line with the objectives of the Fund;
and
(b) perform any other duties as may be assigned by the Senator from time to time.
PART VII – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Transition.
28. When the office of a Senator falls vacant pursuant to Article 103 of the Constitution,
the—
(a) contract signed between the Senator and the member of staff shall become void;
and
(b) the county monitoring and evaluation office manager shall be responsible for
running the office until a new Senator is elected.
Accounting for Commission property.
29. (1) Upon the gazettement of a new Senator, the county monitoring and evaluation
office manager shall hand over the Commission's property to the Clerk or the Clerk's appointed
representative within one month after the gazettement.
(2) The Clerk shall confirm that all handing over procedures have been complied with
before making the final payment of dues, if any.
Winding up of the Fund.
30. Upon winding up of the Fund, the cash balances, assets and liabilities shall be
transferred to the Commission.
Vesting of assets.
31. All assets acquired from the Fund shall remain the property of the Commission and
shall vest in the Commission.
FIRST SCHEDULE
CONDITIONS FOR DISBURSEMENT
The funds shall be disbursed under the following conditions—
1. All disbursements from the Fund to the respective recipients shall be approved and minuted
by the Committee;

-- 181 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 183
[Subsidiary]
2. All disbursements from the Fund's main account shall be made through the recipient's bank
accounts maintained for every recipient by the Fund administrator;
3. The record of the amounts received by each recipient and the record of the amounts so
received shall be submitted to the Committee within 30 days after the close of the financial
year and no disbursements for the succeeding financial year shall be made into the accounts
until the said records are duly received;
4. The Committee shall set out general conditions and requirements for release of funds from
the Fund to ensure efficient and effective management of the Fund;
5. The Committee may impose reasonable requirements including restrictions on a particular
recipient and such restrictions or requirements shall be reported together with the returns to
be submitted to the Senate;
6. Returns from the first tranche made to a recipient in any financial year must be filed with
the administrator of the Fund by the county monitoring and evaluation office manager two
months after the close of the first half of the financial year;
7. Returns from the second tranche made to a recipient in any financial year must be filed
with the administrator of the Fund by the county monitoring and evaluation office manager
two months after the close of the financial year;
8. No disbursement to any recipient will be processed and approved until the administrator of
the Fund is satisfied that the required returns have been adequately filed within the timelines
set; and
9. The administrator of the Fund shall develop a schedule showing documentation to be
submitted upon filing the returns.
SECOND SCHEDULE
FORMULA FOR ALLOCATING MONIES AMONG THE ELECTED SENATORS
PARAMETER WEIGHT (%)
Equal Share q 47
Population s 45
Size of County r 8
CA = ((q (BES))/47) + ((r (SC))/TS) + ((s (CP))/TP)
Where:
CA - Allocation due to Elected Senator
ES - Equal Share
CF - County population
TP - Total Population
SC - Size of the County
TS - Total Size
q, r, s - parameter weights where: q + r + s = 1 or 100%

-- 182 of 625 --

184 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 24(2A)
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT
(PARLIAMENTARY CATERING FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Object of the Fund.
5. Capital of the Fund.
6. Catering Fund Committee.
7. Functions of the Committee.
8. Administration of the Fund.
9. Membership of the Fund.
10. Functions of the Board.
11. Operation of the catering facility.
12. Banking arrangement.
13. Proper books of account.
14. Consultancy and outsourcing of services.
15. Procurement of goods.
16. Audit of books of accounts and financial statements.

-- 183 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 185
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT
(PARLIAMENTARY CATERING FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 103/2019]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance (Parliamentary Catering Fund)
Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“catering facility” means facilities set aside to offer restaurant, bar and incidental services;
"Commission" means the Parliamentary Service Commission established under Article 127
of the Constitution;
"Committee" means the Catering Fund Management Committee established under
regulation 5;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
"Fund" means the Parliamentary Catering Fund established under Regulation 3;
"officer administering the Fund" means the Clerk of the National Assembly; and "Member"
means a Member of Parliament or a former Member of Parliament.
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the Parliamentary Catering Fund which
shall vest in and be operated and managed by the Committee.
Object of the Fund.
4. The object of the Fund shall be to provide for the purchase of catering equipment,
management and administration of catering facilities.
Capital of the Fund.
5. (1) The capital of the Fund shall consist of—
(a) monies standing to the credit of the account on the date of coming into operation
of these Regulations; and
(b) monies appropriated by Parliament to the Fund;
(2) The Fund shall be administered as a special account in the Parliamentary Fund and
shall be operated by the officer administering the Fund.
(3) Monies accruing to the Fund shall, where such monies constitutes a surplus after
meeting the requirements of regulation 10 shall be credited to the capital of the Fund.
Catering Fund Committee.
6. (1) There is established a Committee to be known as the Catering Fund Committee,
which shall consist of—
(a) the chairperson of the Members' Welfare Committee of the Commission;
(b) the chairperson of the Staff Welfare Committee of the Commission;
(c) one member of the Commission not being the chairperson of the Members' Welfare
Committee or Chairperson of the Staff Welfare Committee of the Commission;

-- 184 of 625 --

186 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(d) the Majority Whip of the National Assembly and in his or her absence, the Deputy
Majority Whip;
(e) the Minority Whip of the National Assembly and in his or her absence, the Deputy
Minority Whip;
(f) the Majority Whip of the Senate and in his or her absence, the Deputy Majority
Whip;
(g) the Minority Whip of the Senate and in his or her absence, the Deputy Minority
Whip; and
(h) the Clerk of the Senate.
(2) The Clerk of the National Assembly shall be the Officer Administering the Fund and
the secretary to the Committee.
(3) The meetings of the Committee shall be convened by the chairperson or in the absence
of the chairperson, by a member designated by the chairperson and shall be convened at such
times as may be necessary for the discharge of the Committee's functions.
(4) The quorum for a meeting of the Committee shall be the chairperson and any three
members.
Functions of the Committee.
7. The Committee shall administer the Fund and shall—
(a) recommend conditions on use of any monies in the Fund;
(b) ensure that the monies accruing from the catering facility are used in such a
manner as it deems fit; and
(c) advice the Commission on consultancy and outsourcing of the catering facilities.
Administration of the Fund.
8. (1) The officer administering the Fund shall subject to the directions of the
Committee—
(a) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(b) utilize the monies accruing thereto to defray operating expenses, and may impose
any reasonable restriction or other requirements concerning such use;
(c) cause to be kept books of accounts and other books and records in relation to the
Fund;
(d) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor General in respect of each financial
year and within three (3) months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts
relating to the Fund, prepared and signed by him or her specifying the income of the
Fund and showing the expenditure incurred from the Fund, in such details as the
Commission may from time to time direct in accordance with the Public Finance
Management Act; and
(e) designate and appoint such staff as may be necessary to assist him or her in the
administration of the Fund and may require such staff to carry out such inspections
as may be necessary to verify any information submitted under these Regulations.
(2) Every statement of account prepared under this regulation shall include details of the
balances between the assets and liabilities of the Fund and shall indicate the financial status
of the Fund as at the end of the financial year concerned.

-- 185 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 187
[Subsidiary]
(3) The Committee shall ensure that the monies accruing from catering facilities are used
in such a manner as is deemed just and fit.
(4) The officer administering the Fund shall ensure that there is prudency in
administration of the Fund.
Membership of the Fund.
9. (1) Member desiring to be a member of the Fund shall apply to the Committee for
membership upon payment of a prescribed fee.
(2) The Committee shall prescribe fees payable by a member under paragraph (1).
Functions of the Board.
10. The committee shall ensure that all the expenditure incurred and the monies realized
therein shall be used in—
(a) purchasing goods for supply to the members' catering facility in Parliament;
(b) purchasing equipment for improvement of the catering facility;
(c) providing catering staff training in compliance with the hospitality industry
practices; and
(d) providing catering facilities in compliance with the hospitality industry practices;
and
(e) defraying utility bills such as electricity and water bills.
Operation of the catering facility.
11. (1) The officer administering the Fund shall establish a catering payment system
for the services offered at the catering facility and which shall include card or mobile money
payments and monthly deductions but shall not include cash payments.
(2) Where a member chores a monthly deduction, the prepared of the daily sales to the
member shall be summarized on a monthly basis, duly checked by the Catering Manager
and forwarded to the officer administering the Fund for final authorization to the payroll
department.
(3) Members shall be required to sign their bills promptly to avoid undue delay in effecting
payments and unwarranted financial embarrassment.
(4) A pay bill transaction account shall be created for each member and their visitors.
(5) The Committee shall have the discretion to withdraw its services from members until
all the bills are paid up.
Banking arrangement.
12. (1) For purposes of disbursement of funds under these Regulations, there shall be
opened and maintained a bank account in a commercial bank approved by the Commission.
(2) The bank account contemplated paragraph (1), shall be separate from that of the
Commission.
(3) The signatories to the Fund account under paragraph (1), shall be the officer
administering the Fund and two other persons authorized by the Commission from amongst
the staff of the Commission.

-- 186 of 625 --

188 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Proper books of account.
13. (1) The officer administering the Fund shall be responsible for the maintenance of
proper books of accounts and the preparation of annual financial statements which shall
include—
(a) an income and expenditure account;
(b) a statement of financial position; and
(c) a statement of cash flows.
(2) The officer administering the Fund shall ensure that the accounts of the Fund and the
annual financial statements relating to those accounts comply with the prescribed accounting
standards.
(3) The officer administering the Fund shall cause to be prepared quarterly returns and
financial statements to be submitted to the Commission.
Consultancy and outsourcing of services.
14. (1) The Commission may, if it considers it appropriate and upon advice by the
Committee engage such experts or consultants to assist in the discharge of the functions of
the Fund upon such terms and conditions as the Committee may determine.
(2) The Commission may outsource catering facilities upon such terms and conditions as
the Committee may determine.
Procurement of goods.
15. (1) The Public Procurement and Assets Disposal Act (Cap. 412C) and regulations shall
guide the procurement of goods and services.
(2) Subject to paragraph (1), the Commission shall establish a catering management
system to aid in the procurement and sale of alcoholic drinks and soft drinks.
Audit of books of accounts and financial statements.
16. The annual financial statements of the fund shall be subject to audit by the Auditor
General in accordance with Articles 226 and 229 of the Constitution of Kenya and the Public
Audit Act (Cap. 412B).

-- 187 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 189
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 24(3)
THE PUBLIC FINANCE (PARLIAMENTARY
MORTGAGE (STAFF) SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the fund.
4. Object and purpose of the Fund.
5. Capital of the Fund.
6. The Loans Management Committee.
7. Commission may appoint mortgage institution.
8. Utilization of loan monies.
9. Disbursement of loans for development.
10. Application for a loan.
11. Leasehold property.
12. Maximum loan disbursement.
13. Repayment of loan.
14. Administrative Costs.
15. Lien.
16. Mortgage insurance.
17. Default in repayment.
18. Administration of the Fund.
19. Responsibilities of mortgage institution.
20. Supplementary terms.
21. Transition.
22. Repeal of L.N. 46/2008.
SCHEDULE — SCHEDULE [R. 12(1)]

-- 188 of 625 --

190 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE (PARLIAMENTARY
MORTGAGE (STAFF) SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 18/2013, L.N. 48/2020, L.N. 187/2020]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance (Parliamentary Mortgage (Staff)
Scheme Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“borrower” means a person in receipt of a loan out of the Fund;
“Commission” means the Parliamentary Service Commission established under section
45B of the former Constitution as continued under Article 127 of the Constitution;
“Committee” means the Loans Management Committee established under regulation 6;
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
“Fund” means the Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund established under the
Government Financial Management (Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund) Regulations and
continued under paragraph 9 of the Second Schedule to the Public Finance Management Act;
“member of the Scheme” means an employee of the Parliamentary Service Commission
who is employed on permanent and pensionable terms;
“Nairobi” means the metropolis of Nairobi as designated by the ministry for the time being
responsible for metropolitan development;
“Officer Administering the Fund” means the Clerk of the National Assembly;
“property” means a residential house purchased through a loan from the Fund and
includes the land purchased under loan from the Fund on which such house is to be developed;
“valuer” means a person registered as a valuer under the Valuers Act (Cap. 532).
Establishment of the fund.
3. The Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund established under the Government Financial
Management (Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund) Regulations, 2008 established under
the Government Financial Management Act (now repealed) is continued.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
4. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide a loan scheme for the purchase,
development, renovation or repair of residential property by members of the Scheme.
Capital of the Fund.
5. (1) The initial capital of the Fund shall consist of the monies standing to the credit of
the account on the date of the coming into operation of these Regulations.
(2) Parliament may appropriate additional monies to the Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be administered as a special account in the Parliamentary Fund and
shall be operated by the Officer Administering the Fund.
(4) The administrative costs accruing to the Fund shall, where such administrative costs
constitutes a surplus after meeting the requirements of regulation 18(1)(b) be credited to the
capital of the Fund.
[L.N. 48/2020, rr. 2 & 3, L.N. 187/2020, rr. 2 & 3.]

-- 189 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 191
[Subsidiary]
The Loans Management Committee.
6. (1) There is established a committee to be known as the Loans Management Committee,
which shall consist of—
(a) the vice-chairman of the Commission who shall be the chairman;
(b) the chairman of the Staff Welfare Committee of the Commission;
(c) the Clerk of the Senate;
(d) the Director-General of Parliament; and
(e) a member of the Scheme elected by the members of the Scheme.
(2) The officer administering the Fund shall be an ex officio member of the Committee and
the secretary to the Committee.
(3) The Committee shall administer the Fund and shall—
(a) process applications for loans in accordance with the existing terms and conditions
of borrowing;
(b) liaise with the housing company (if any) to set up a revolving fund for the
disbursement of the loans; and
(c) supervise the day-to-day running of the Fund.
(4) The meetings of the Committee shall be convened by the chairman or in the absence
of the chairman, by a member designated by the chairperson and shall be convened at such
times as may be necessary for the discharge of the Committee’s functions.
(5) The quorum for a meeting of the Committee shall be the chairman and any three
members.
(6) The Committee shall meet at least once every calendar month.
[L.N. 48/2020, r. 4, L.N. 187/2020, r. 4.]
Commission may appoint mortgage institution.
7. Notwithstanding regulation 6(3), the Commission may, if it considers it appropriate to
do so, appoint a mortgage institution to administer the Fund on its behalf.
Utilization of loan monies.
8. (1) A member of the Scheme who wishes to apply for a loan from the Fund shall
make such application to the officer administering the Fund in such manner as the Loans
Management Committee may prescribe.
(2) A loan obtained under these Regulations shall be utilized for the purchase,
development, renovation or repair of residential property for the occupation of the applicant
and his or her immediate family.
(3) A loan for the development of residential property may be granted at the discretion
of the Committee—
(a) to a member of the Scheme who is in possession of a title deed to the land on which
the development is intended to be carried out; or
(b) in two installments, for the purchase of the land at which the residential property
is to be developed and for the subsequent development of the property.
(4) The amount of the first installment granted for the purchase of land under paragraph
(3)(b) shall not exceed forty per cent of the maximum loan amount for which the member of
the Scheme is eligible.

-- 190 of 625 --

192 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Disbursement of loans for development.
9. A loan granted for the development of a residential property under these Regulations
shall be released to the applicant in the following phases—
(a) the first disbursement based on the value of the land on which the residential
property is proposed to be developed; and
(b) the subsequent disbursements based on the rate of completion of the various
phases of development as certified by a qualified valuer at the cost of the applicant.
Application for a loan.
10. (1) An application for a loan under these Regulations shall be accompanied by the
following documents where appropriate—
(a) copies of the designs of the proposed residential property duly approved by the
local authority within whose area it is to be situated;
(b) bills of quantities in respect of the proposed development, renovation or repair;
(c) an official search of the title to the property intended to be purchased;
(d) a certified copy of the sale agreement relating to the property.
(2) The applicant shall bear the cost of stamp duty and other legal fees.
(3) Where a borrower fails to comply with the requirements of paragraph (2) within the
stipulated time, the officer administering the Fund shall, upon giving the borrower fourteen
days’ notice, deduct the amount due from the salary of that borrower in such installments as
may be appropriate and remit such deductions to meet such costs as may be due.
(4) All legal transactions in respect of the property being purchased shall be conducted
by an advocate appointed by the Commission.
Leasehold property.
11. Where the property intended to be purchased through a loan from the Fund is
leasehold property, such loan shall be granted where the expiry date of such lease is at least
forty-five years beyond the final loan repayment date.
Maximum loan disbursement.
12. (1) The maximum loan entitlement for a member of the Scheme in respect of the
designation or job group scale specified in the first column of the Schedule shall not exceed
the respective amount set out in the second column of the Schedule.
(2) For a member of the Scheme to qualify for a loan, such member shall be required to be—
(a) confirmed in appointment; or
(b) on contract with the Parliamentary Service Commission with the relevant
documentation duly completed.
(3) A loan granted to a borrower under these Regulations shall be funded at the rate of—
(a) ninety per centum of the value of the property, where such property is situated in
Nairobi; and
(b) eighty per centum of such value where the property is situated in any other area,
and the borrower shall be required to deposit the balance thereof with the Fund.

-- 191 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 193
[Subsidiary]
Repayment of loan.
13. A loan granted under these Regulations shall be repayable within a period of twenty-
five years or the remaining period of service of the borrower, whichever is less.
[L.N. 48/2020, r. 5, L.N. 187/2020, r. 5.]
Administrative Costs.
14. (1) The administrative costs chargeable on a loan shall be three per centum per
annum on a monthly reducing balance and this rate may be reduced from time to time at the
discretion of the Commission.
(2) A mortgage institution appointed under regulation 7 to administer the Fund may
charge an administrative costs of not more than four per centum to cover management costs.
(3) The administrative costs charged under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this regulation shall
be met by the borrower.
[L.N. 48/2020, r. 6, L.N. 187/2020, r. 6.]
Lien.
15. (1) The Commission shall have a charge registered on the property financed through
a loan granted under these Regulations and shall be entitled to have its name entered in all
documents of title for such property.
(2) The borrower shall—
(a) not mortgage, charge, surrender the lease or sell or agree to sell or part with
possession of the charged property or any part thereof without the prior written
consent of the Commission;
(b) meet and pay all rates, rents, insurances and any other outgoings in respect of the
property and send the proof of such payments to the Commission; and
(c) provide a transfer deed duly signed by the borrower and a letter authorizing the
Commission to sell the property in case of default in payment.
(3) All residential properties purchased through the Fund shall be constructed of such
material as may be acceptable to the Commission.
(4) During the loan repayment period, every borrower shall—
(a) ensure that the property is used for residential purposes only;
(b) maintain the property in a satisfactory state of repair; and
(c) not alter or make any structural alteration to the property, carry out any valuation,
assessment or investigation relating to the property or title thereto, as the case
may be, without the approval of the Commission.
(5) No borrower shall be eligible for more than one loan at a time.
(6) All legal documentation and disbursement of funds shall be supervised by the officer
administering the Fund.
[L.N. 48/2020, r. 7, L.N. 187/2020, r. 7.]
Mortgage insurance.
16. (1) A borrower shall take out and maintain a mortgage protection policy and a fire
policy with an insurance firm approved by the Commission, the cost of which shall be paid
out of the Fund and debited in such borrower’s account.

-- 192 of 625 --

194 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The originals of all documents relating to property financed by a loan from the Fund
shall be kept in safe custody by the officer administering the Fund.
Default in repayment.
17. The Commission may call in a loan and in default sell the charged property by
public auction or private treaty where the borrower is in breach of the terms under the loan
agreement or the covenant contained in the charge of the mortgage instrument.
Administration of the Fund.
18. (1) The officer administering the Fund shall—
(a) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(b) utilize the administrative costs accruing thereto to defray operating expenses, and
may impose any reasonable restriction or other requirements concerning such use;
(c) cause to be kept books of accounts and other books and records in relation to the
Fund and for all loans financed from the Fund;
(d) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial
year and within three (3) months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts
relating to the Fund, prepared and signed by him specifying the income of the
Fund and showing the expenditure incurred from the Fund, in such details as the
Commission may from time to time direct in accordance with the Public Finance
Management Act;
(e) furnish such additional information as may be required for the purpose of
examination and audit by the Auditor-General; and
(f) designate and appoint such staff as may be necessary to assist him in the
administration of the Fund and may require such staff to carry out such inspections
as may be necessary to verify any information submitted under these Regulations.
(2) Every statement of account prepared under this regulation shall include details of the
balances between the assets and liabilities of the Fund and shall indicate the financial status
of the Fund as at the end of the financial year concerned.
[L.N. 48/2020, r. 8, L.N. 187/2020, r. 8.]
Responsibilities of mortgage institution.
19. The responsibilities of the mortgage institution, if any, appointed under these
Regulations shall be—
(a) to operate individual accounts for each borrower, which shall provide details of
recoveries of the loan;
(b) to charge security on properties acquired through loans from the Fund to protect
the interests of the Fund and act as custodian of such charges;
(c) to disburse cheques for newly approved loans to various vendors, after the
necessary documentation is completed by the Committee;
(d) to pay all outgoings and issue demand notices where necessary to members
through the officer administering the Fund;
(e) upon repayment of the loan, interest and other expenses which may be
outstanding, to discharge the charge and release the security documents to the
borrower; and

-- 193 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 195
[Subsidiary]
(f) upon default, to call in the loan and on behalf of the Commission sell the charged
property by public auction or private treaty, in which event the Fund shall meet
any shortfall between the loan outstanding and the proceeds of sale.
Supplementary terms.
20. (1) These Regulations shall be supplemented by such terms as may, from time to time,
be detailed in the application form supplied by the Commission and in the contract between
the mortgage institution and the Commission.
(2) Subject to these Regulations, the Commission shall issue guidelines on—
(a) the purchase and development of land and residential properties under these
Regulations;
(b) the utilization of surplus Funds for the purchase and development of land and
residential property under these Regulations; and
(c) such other matters as may be necessary for the proper management and
administration of the Fund.
Transition.
21. A person who immediately prior to the commencement of these Regulations was
servicing a loan obtained under the Regulations shall be entitled to enhance the principal
amount of the loan to the respective amount provided for in the Schedule.
Repeal of L.N. 46/2008.
22. The Government Financial Management (Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund)
Regulations (L.N. 46/2008) are repealed.
SCHEDULE
(r. 12(1))
Designation/job Group Scale Maximum entitlement
PSC 6 KSh. 8,000,000
PSC 5 KSh. 7,000,000
PSC 4 KSh. 6,000,000
PSC 1-3 KSh. 5,000,000

-- 194 of 625 --

196 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (PARLIAMENTARY
CAR LOAN (MEMBERS) SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Object and purpose of the Fund.
5. Initial capital.
6. The Loans Management Committee.
7. Operation of the Fund.
8. Conditions for disbursement of funds.
9. Temporary release of log-book.
10. Loan amounts.
11. Administrative Costs.
12. Repayment Period.
13. Insurance.
14. Loan discharge.
15. Administration of the Fund.
16. Repeal of L.N. 148 of 1999 and transition.

-- 195 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 197
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (PARLIAMENTARY
CAR LOAN (MEMBERS) SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 68/2013, L.N. 167/2015, L.N. 45/2020, L.N. 184/2020]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Parliamentary Car
Loan (Members) Scheme Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Commission” means the Parliamentary Service Commission established under section
45B of the former Constitution as continued under Article 127 of the Constitution;
“Committee” means the Loans Management Committee established under regulation 6;
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
“Fund” means the Parliamentary Car Loan Scheme Fund established under the Exchequer
and Audit (Members of the National Assembly Car Loan Scheme Fund) Regulations and
continued under paragraph 9 of the Second Schedule to the Public Finance Management Act
(Cap. 412A);
“hire purchase agreement” means an agreement for the bailment of goods under which
the bailee may buy the goods or under which the property in the goods will or may pass to
the bailee;
“member of the Scheme” means a member of Parliament; and
“officer administering the Fund” means the Clerk of the National Assembly.
Establishment of the Fund.
3. The Parliamentary Car Loan Scheme Fund established under the Exchequer and Audit
(Member of the National Assembly Car Loan Scheme Fund) Regulations established under the
Government Financial Management Act (now repealed) is continued.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
4. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide a loan scheme for the purchase
of vehicles by members of the Scheme.
Initial capital.
5. (1) The initial capital of the Fund shall consist of the monies standing to the credit of
the account on the date of the coming into operation of these Regulations.
(2) Parliament may appropriate additional monies to the Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be administered as a special account in the Parliamentary Fund and
shall be operated by the officer administering the Fund.
The Loans Management Committee.
6. (1) There is established a committee to be known as the Loans Management Committee,
which shall consist of—
(a) the vice-chairperson of the Commission who shall be the chairperson;
(b) the chairperson of the Members’ Welfare Committee of the Commission;
(c) the Majority Whip of the National Assembly;
(d) the Minority Whip of the National Assembly;

-- 196 of 625 --

198 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(e) the Majority Whip of the Senate;
(f) the Minority Whip of the Senate; and
(g) the Clerk of the Senate.
(2) The officer administering the Fund shall be an ex officio member of the Committee
and the secretary to the Committee.
(3) The meetings of the Committee shall be convened by the chairperson or in the absence
of the chairperson, by a member designated by the chairperson and shall be convened at such
times as may be necessary for the discharge of the Committee’s functions.
(4) The quorum for meetings of the Committee shall be the chairperson and any three
members.
(5) The Committee shall consider and may approve the loan applications presented by the
officer administering the Fund.
(6) The Committee shall meet at least once every calendar month.
[L.N. 45/2020, r. 2, L.N. 184/2020, r. 2.]
Operation of the Fund.
7. (1) A member of the Scheme who wishes to apply for a loan from the Fund shall present
to the officer administering the Fund a duly completed hire purchase proposal form in such
form as the Management Committee may prescribe.
(2) The officer administering the Fund shall satisfy himself of the applicant’s financial
status and capacity to repay the loan applied for and where so satisfied shall forward the
application to the Committee for consideration.
(3) If the Committee approves the application, the applicant shall enter into a hire
purchase agreement in such form as the Committee may prescribe.
Conditions for disbursement of funds.
8. (1) A loan approved under regulation 7 shall be released from the Fund in such manner,
taking into account the security of the funds, as may be prescribed by the Committee.
(2) The log-book of a vehicle subject to a loan from the Fund shall be issued jointly
between the Parliamentary Service Commission and the member of the Scheme and shall be
kept in the custody of the officer administering the Fund until the loan is repaid in full by the
member of the Scheme.
Temporary release of log-book.
9. (1) A log-book kept in custody by the officer administering the Fund may be temporarily
released to a member of the Scheme upon application in writing to the officer administering
the Fund for purposes of renewal by that member of the necessary licences.
(2) A log-book released under paragraph (1) shall be returned to the officer administering
the Fund within seven working days from the date of such release.
(3) The officer administering the Fund shall acknowledge receipt of the log-book in
writing.
Loan amounts.
10. (1) The loan amount that a member of the Scheme may receive shall be the value
of the vehicle that the member of the Scheme proposes to purchase subject to but shall not
exceed in the case of—
(a) a Speaker of a House of Parliament, ten million shillings; and

-- 197 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 199
[Subsidiary]
(b) a Member of Parliament, eight million shillings.
(2) For the purpose of these Regulations, the value of a new vehicle shall be as quoted on
the invoice from the supplier whereas the value of a used vehicle shall be as determined by
a report from the body known as the Automobile Association of Kenya, or the Government
department dealing with such matters.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), there may be advanced from the
Fund to a member of the Scheme an additional loan not exceeding ten per cent of the value
of the vehicle purchased by the member of the Scheme to cater for an overhaul of the engine
of the vehicle.
(4) No member of the Scheme shall receive a loan the repayment of which shall result
in salary deductions exceeding thirty per cent of the monthly emoluments of the member of
the Scheme.
[L.N. 167/2015, r. 2.]
Administrative Costs.
11. (1) A loan granted to a member of the Scheme under these Regulations shall be
charged administrative costs at the rate of three per cent per annum.
(2) The administrative costs charged under paragraph (1) shall be utilized to defray the
administrative expenses of the Fund.
[L.N. 45/2020, r. 3, L.N. 184/2020, r. 3.]
Repayment Period.
12. A loan advanced under these Regulations shall be repaid in full over a maximum period
of sixty (60) months irrespective of whether the vehicle purchased is new or used.
Insurance.
13. (1) A member of the Scheme shall comprehensively insure any vehicle purchased
through the Scheme.
(2) Where a member of the Scheme is unable to raise the funds required for the initial
insurance premium, such funds may be advanced from the Fund subject to an approved limit,
but subsequently annual premiums shall be paid by the member of the Scheme.
(3) A member of the Scheme who is unable to pay the subsequent annual premiums
referred to in paragraph (2) may apply to the fund for a loan which shall be repaid within a
period of one year (1) year.
(4) Every loan granted under these Regulations shall be insured for the benefit of the
member of the Scheme and the premium in respect thereof shall be debited to the account
of the member of the Fund.
Loan discharge.
14. (1) Upon full repayment of the loan, a signed loan discharge certificate in such form
as may be prescribed by the Committee shall be issued to the member of the Scheme and a
copy thereof shall be forwarded to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
(2) The loan discharge certificates shall release the member of the Scheme from any
further financial obligation in respect of the loan and shall act as sufficient authority to
remove the caveat on the vehicle pursuant to regulation 8.

-- 198 of 625 --

200 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Administration of the Fund.
15. (1) The officer administering the Fund—
(a) shall supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(b) may impose conditions on the use of any moneys in the Fund and may also impose
any reasonable restriction or other requirement concerning such use;
(c) shall cause to be kept, books of accounts and other books and records in relation
to the Fund and for all loans financed from the Fund;
(d) shall prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial
year and within three (3) months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts
relating to the Fund, prepared and signed by him specifying the income of the
Fund and showing the expenditure incurred from the Fund, in such details as the
Commission may from time to time direct in accordance with the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
(e) shall furnish such additional information as he may deem to be proper and
sufficient for the purpose of examination and audit by the Controller and Auditor-
General.
(2) Every statement of account prepared under this regulation shall include details of the
balances between the assets and liabilities of the Fund and shall indicate the financial status
of the Fund as at the end of the financial year concerned.
Repeal of L.N. 148 of 1999 and transition.
16. (1) The Exchequer and Audit (Members of the National Assembly Car Loan Scheme
Fund) Regulations (L.N. 148/1999), are repealed.
(2) All the funds and other assets, rights, powers and liabilities which immediately before
the coming into force of these Regulations were vested in or imposed on or enforceable against
the Fund repealed by paragraph (1) shall, by virtue of this paragraph, be vested in, imposed
on or enforceable against the Fund.
(3) Until the constitution of the Parliamentary Service Commission established under
Article 127 of the Constitution, the Loans Management Committee established under the
Exchequer and Audit (Members of the National Assembly Car Loan Scheme Fund) Regulations
existing immediately prior to the commencement of these Regulations shall continue in
office.

-- 199 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 201
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (PARLIAMENTARY
CAR LOAN (STAFF) SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Object and purpose of the Fund.
5. Initial capital.
6. The Loans Management Committee.
7. Operation of the Fund.
8. Conditions for disbursement of funds.
9. Temporary release of log-book.
10. Loan amounts.
11. Administrative Costs.
12. Repayment Period.
13. Insurance.
14. Loan discharge.
15. Administration of the Fund.
16. Repeal of L.N. 148/1999 and transition.
SCHEDULE — MAXIMUM LOAN ENTITLEMENTS FOR MEMBERS OF THE
SCHEME

-- 200 of 625 --

202 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (PARLIAMENTARY
CAR LOAN (STAFF) SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 19/2013, L.N. 169/2015, L.N. 47/2020, L.N. 186/2020]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance (Parliamentary Car Loan (Staff)
Scheme Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Commission” means the Parliamentary Service Commission established under section
45B of the former Constitution as continued under Article 127 of the Constitution;
“Committee” means the Loans Management Committee established under regulation 6;
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
“Fund” means the Parliamentary Car Loan Scheme Fund established under the Exchequer
and Audit (Members of the National Assembly Car Loan Scheme Fund) Regulations and
continued under paragraph 9 of the Second Schedule to the Public Finance Management Act
(Cap. 412A);
“hire purchase agreement” means an agreement for the bailment of goods under which
the bailee may buy the goods or under which the property in the goods will or may pass to
the bailee;
“member of the Scheme” means an employee of the Commission who is employed on
permanent and pensionable terms; and
“Officer Administering the Fund” means the Clerk of the National Assembly.
Establishment of the Fund.
3. The Parliamentary Car Loan Scheme Fund established under the Exchequer and Audit
(Members of the National Assembly Car Loan Scheme Fund) Regulations, 1999 established
under the Government Financial Management Act (now repealed) is continued.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
4. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide a loan scheme for the purchase
of vehicles by members of the Scheme.
Initial capital.
5. (1) The initial capital of the Fund shall consist of the monies standing to the credit of
the Fund on the date of the coming into operation of these Regulations.
(2) Parliament may appropriate additional monies to the Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be administered as a special account in the Parliamentary Fund and
shall be operated by the Officer Administering the Fund.
The Loans Management Committee.
6. (1) There is established a committee to be known as the Loans Management Committee,
which shall consist of—
(a) the vice-chairperson of the Commission who shall be the chairperson;
(b) the chairperson of the Staff Welfare Committee of the Commission;
(c) the Clerk of the Senate;

-- 201 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 203
[Subsidiary]
(d) the Director-General of the Joint Parliamentary Services; and
(e) a member of the Scheme elected by the members of the Scheme.
(2) The meetings of the Committee shall be convened by the chairperson or in the absence
of the chairperson, by a member designated by the chairperson and shall be convened at such
times as may be necessary for the discharge of the Committee’s functions.
(3) The quorum for meetings of the Committee shall be the chairperson and any two
members.
(4) The Committee shall consider and may approve the loan applications presented by the
Officer Administering the Fund.
(5) The Committee shall meet at least once every calendar month.
[L.N. 47/2020, r. 2, L.N. 186/2020, r. 2.]
Operation of the Fund.
7. (1) A member of the Scheme who wishes to apply for a loan from the Fund shall present
to the Officer Administering the Fund a duly completed hire purchase proposal form in such
form as the Management Committee may prescribe.
(2) The Officer Administering the Fund shall satisfy himself of the applicant’s financial
status and capacity to repay the loan applied for and where so satisfied shall forward the
application to the Committee for consideration.
(3) If the Committee approves the application, the applicant shall enter into a hire
purchase agreement in such form as the Committee may prescribe.
Conditions for disbursement of funds.
8. (1) A loan approved under regulation 7 shall be released from the Fund in such manner,
taking into account the security of the funds, as may be prescribed by the Committee.
(2) The log-book of a vehicle subject to a loan from the Fund shall be issued jointly
between the Parliamentary Service Commission and the member of the Scheme and shall be
kept in the custody of the Officer Administering the Fund until the loan is repaid in full by
the member of the Scheme.
Temporary release of log-book.
9. (1) A log-book kept in custody by the Officer Administering the Fund may be
temporarily released to a member of the Scheme upon application in writing to the Officer
Administering the Fund for purposes of renewal by that member of the necessary licences.
(2) A log-book released under paragraph (1) shall be returned to the Officer Administering
the Fund within seven working days from the date of such release.
(3) The Officer Administering the Fund shall acknowledge receipt of the log-book in
writing.
Loan amounts.
10. (1) The loan amount that a member of the Scheme may receive shall be the value
of the vehicle that the member of the Scheme proposes to purchase subject to the maximum
amount as set out in the Schedule to these Regulations.
(2) For the purpose of these Regulations, the value of a new vehicle shall be as quoted on
the invoice from the supplier whereas the value of a used vehicle shall be as determined by
a report from the body known as the Automobile Association of Kenya, or the Government
department dealing with such matters.

-- 202 of 625 --

204 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), there may be advanced from the
Fund to a member of the Scheme an additional loan not exceeding ten per cent of the value
of the vehicle purchased by the member of the Scheme to cater for an overhaul of the engine
of the vehicle.
(4) No member of the Scheme shall receive a loan the repayment of which shall result
in salary deductions exceeding thirty per cent of the monthly emoluments of the member of
the Scheme.
Administrative Costs.
11. (1) A loan granted to a member of the Scheme under these Regulations shall be
charged administrative costs at the rate of three per cent per annum.
(2) The administrative costs charged under paragraph (1) shall be utilized to defray the
administrative expenses of the Fund.
[L.N. 47/2020, r. 3, L.N. 186/2020, r. 3.]
Repayment Period.
12. A loan advanced under these Regulations shall be repaid in full over a maximum period
of sixty months
Insurance.
13. (1) A member of the Scheme shall comprehensively insure any vehicle purchased
through the Fund.
(2) Where a member of the Scheme is unable to raise the funds required for the initial
insurance premium, such funds may be advanced from the Fund subject to an approved limit,
but subsequent annual premiums shall be paid by the member of the Scheme.
(3) A member of the Scheme who is unable to pay the subsequent annual premiums
referred to in paragraph (2) may apply to the fund for a loan which shall be repaid within a
period of one year (1) year.
(4) Every loan granted under these Regulations shall be insured for the benefit of the
member of the Scheme and the premium in respect of the loan shall be debited to the account
of the member of the Scheme.
Loan discharge.
14. (1) Upon full repayment of the loan, a signed loan discharge certificate in such form
as may be prescribed by the Committee shall be issued to the member of the Scheme and a
copy of the discharge certificate shall be forwarded to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
(2) The loan discharge certificate shall release the member of the Scheme from any further
financial obligation in respect of the loan and shall act as sufficient authority to remove the
caveat on the vehicle pursuant to regulation 8.
Administration of the Fund.
15. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund—
(a) shall supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(b) may impose conditions on the use of any moneys in the Fund and may also impose
any reasonable restriction or other requirement concerning such use;
(c) shall cause to be kept books of accounts and other books and records in relation to
the Fund and for all loans financed from the Fund;

-- 203 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 205
[Subsidiary]
(d) shall prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial
year and within three (3) months after the end of the financial year, a statement of
accounts relating to the Fund, prepared and signed by him specifying the income
of the Fund and showing the expenditure incurred from the Fund, in such details
as the Commission may from time to time direct in accordance with the Public
Finance Management Act;
(e) shall furnish such additional information as he may deem to be proper and
sufficient for the purpose of examination and audit by the Auditor-General.
(2) Every statement of account prepared under this regulation shall include details of the
balances between the assets and liabilities of the Fund and shall indicate the financial status
of the Fund as at the end of the financial year concerned.
Repeal of L.N. 148/1999 and transition.
16. (1) The Exchequer and Audit (Members of the National Assembly Car Loan Scheme
Fund) Regulations (L.N. 148/1999), are repealed.
(2) All the funds and other assets, rights, powers and liabilities which immediately before
the coming into force of these Regulations were vested in or imposed on or enforceable against
the Fund repealed by paragraph (1) shall, by virtue of this paragraph, be vested in, imposed
on or enforceable against the Fund.
(3) Until the constitution of the Parliamentary Service Commission established under
Article 127 of the Constitution, the Loans Management Committee established under
the Exchequer and Audit (Members of the National Assembly Car Loan Scheme Fund)
Regulations, 1999 existing immediately prior to the commencement of these Regulations
shall continue in office and continue to operate as such.
SCHEDULE
Maximum Loan Entitlements for Members of the Scheme
(r. 10)
[L.N. 169 of 2015.]
Designation Job Group Scale Maximum entitlement
Clerk of a House of Parliament KSh. 8.000.000
PSC 16 KSh. 6.000,000
PSC 15 KSh. 5.500,000
PSC 14 KSh. 5.000.000
PSC 13 KSh. 4.500.000
PSC 12 KSh. 4,000.000
PSC 11 KSh. 3.500,000
PSC 10 KSh. 3,000,000
PSC 9 KSh. 3.000,000
PSC 8 KSh. 3,000,000
PSC 7 KSh. 2,500.000
PSC 6 KSh. 2,500.000
PSC 5 KSh. 2,500.000
PSC 4 KSh. 2.500.000

-- 204 of 625 --

206 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Designation Job Group Scale Maximum entitlement
PSC 1-3 KSh. 2,500.000

-- 205 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 207
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (PARLIAMENTARY
MORTGAGE (MEMBERS) SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Object and purpose of the Fund.
5. Capital of the Fund.
6. The Loans Management Committee.
7. Commission may appoint mortgage institution.
8. Utilization of loan monies.
9. Disbursement of loans for development.
10. Application for a loan.
11. Leasehold property.
12. Maximum loan disbursement.
13. Repayment of loan.
14. Administrative Costs.
15. Lien.
16. Mortgage insurance.
17. Default in repayment.
18. Administration of the Fund.
19. Responsibilities of mortgage institution.
20. Supplementary terms.
21. Repeal of L.N. 46/2008.

-- 206 of 625 --

208 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (PARLIAMENTARY
MORTGAGE (MEMBERS) SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 67/2013, L.N. 168/2015, L.N. 46/2020, L.N. 185/2020]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Parliamentary
Mortgage (Members) Scheme Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“borrower” means a person in receipt of a loan out of the Fund;
“Commission” means the Parliamentary Service Commission established under section
45B of the former Constitution as continued under Article 127 of the Constitution;
“Committee” means the Loans Management Committee established under regulation 6;
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
“Fund” means the Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund established under the
Government Financial Management (Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund) Regulations,
2008 and continued under paragraph 9 of the Second Schedule to the Public Finance
Management Act;
“member of the Scheme” means a Member of Parliament;
“Nairobi” means the metropolis of Nairobi as designated by the ministry for the time being
responsible for metropolitan development;
“officer administering the Fund” means the Clerk of the National Assembly;
“property” means a residential house purchased through a loan from the Fund and
includes the land purchased under loan from the Fund on which such house is to be developed;
“valuer” means a person registered as a valuer under the Valuers Act (Cap. 532).
Establishment of the Fund.
3. The Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund established under the Government Financial
Management (Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund) Regulations established under the
Government Financial Management Act (now repealed) is continued.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
4. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide a loan scheme for the purchase,
development, renovation or repair of residential property by members of the Scheme.
Capital of the Fund.
5. (1) The initial capital of the Fund shall consist of the monies standing to the credit of
the account on the date of the coming into operation of these Regulations.
(2) Parliament may appropriate additional monies to the Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be administered as a special account in the Parliamentary Fund and
shall be operated by the officer administering the Fund.
(4) The administrative costs accruing to the Fund shall, where such administrative costs
constitutes a surplus after meeting the requirements of regulation 18(1)(b) and be credited
to the capital of the Fund.
[LN 46/2020, rr. 2 & 3, LN 185/2020, rr. 2 & 3.]

-- 207 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 209
[Subsidiary]
The Loans Management Committee.
6. (1) There is established a committee to be known as the Members Mortgage Loans
Management Committee, which shall consist of—
(a) the vice-chairman of the Commission who shall be the chairman;
(b) the chairman of the Members’ Welfare Committee of the Commission;
(c) two other members of the Commission, appointed by the Commission;
(d) the Majority Whip of the National Assembly;
(e) the Minority Whip of the National Assembly;
(f) the Majority Whip of the Senate;
(g) the Minority Whip of the Senate; and
(h) the Clerk of the Senate.
(2) The officer administering the Fund shall be an ex officio member of the Committee and
the secretary to the Committee.
(3) The Committee shall administer the Fund and shall—
(a) process applications for loans in accordance with the existing terms and conditions
of borrowing;
(b) liaise with the housing company (if any) to set up a revolving fund for the
disbursement of the loans; and
(c) supervise the day-to-day running of the Fund.
(4) The meetings of the Committee shall be convened by the chairman or in the absence
of the chairman, by a member designated by the chairperson and shall be convened at such
times as may be necessary for the discharge of the Committee’s functions.
(5) The quorum for a meeting of the Committee shall be the chairman and any three
members.
(6) The Committee shall meet at least once every calendar month.
[LN 46/2020, r. 4, LN 185/2020, r. 4.]
Commission may appoint mortgage institution.
7. Notwithstanding regulation 6(3), the Commission may, if it considers it appropriate to
do so, appoint a mortgage institution to administer the Fund on its behalf.
Utilization of loan monies.
8. (1) A member of the Scheme who wishes to apply for a loan from the Fund shall
make such application to the officer administering the Fund in such manner as the Loans
Management Committee may prescribe.
(2) A loan obtained under these Regulations shall be utilized for the purchase,
development, renovation or repair of residential property for the occupation of the applicant
and his or her immediate family.
(3) A loan for the development of residential property may be granted at the discretion
of the Committee—
(a) to a member of the Scheme who is in possession of a title deed to the land on which
the development is intended to be carried out; or

-- 208 of 625 --

210 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) in two instalments, for the purchase of the land at which the residential property
is to be developed and for the subsequent development of the property.
(4) The amount of the first instalment granted for the purchase of land under paragraph
(3)(b) shall not exceed forty per cent of the maximum loan amount for which the member of
the Scheme is eligible.
Disbursement of loans for development.
9. A loan granted for the development of a residential property under these Regulations
shall be released to the applicant in the following phases—
(a) the first disbursement based on the value of the land on which the residential
property is proposed to be developed; and
(b) the subsequent disbursements based on the rate of completion of the various
phases of development as certified by a qualified valuer at the cost of the applicant.
Application for a loan.
10. (1) An application for a loan under these Regulations shall be accompanied by the
following documents where appropriate—
(a) copies of the designs of the proposed residential property duly approved by the
local authority within whose area it is to be situated;
(b) bills of quantities in respect of the proposed development, renovation or repair;
(c) an official search of the title to the property intended to be purchased;
(d) a certified copy of the sale agreement relating to the property.
(2) The applicant shall bear the cost of stamp duty and other legal fees.
(3) Where a borrower fails to comply with the requirements of paragraph (2) within the
stipulated time, the officer administering the Fund shall, upon giving the borrower fourteen
days’ notice, deduct the amount due from the salary of that borrower in such instalments as
may be appropriate and remit such deductions to meet such costs as may be due.
(4) All legal transactions in respect of the property being purchased shall be conducted
by an advocate appointed by the Commission.
Leasehold property.
11. Where the property intended to be purchased through a loan from the Fund is
leasehold property, such loan shall be granted where the expiry date of such lease is at least
forty-five years beyond the final loan repayment date.
Maximum loan disbursement.
12. (1) The maximum loan to be granted under these Regulations to a member of the
Scheme shall be a sum equivalent to the member’s net emoluments at the time of application
multiplied by the number of months remaining for the life of that Parliament:
(1A) Despite paragraph (1), a loan granted to a member of the scheme under these
Regulations shall not, in the case of—
(a) a Speaker of a House of Parliament, exceed forty million shillings; and
(b) a Member of Parliament, exceed thirty five million shillings.
(2) A member of the Scheme shall be required to give prior authority in writing for pension
dues to be utilized to clear any outstanding debt in case the member losses the parliamentary
seat before fully repaying the loan.

-- 209 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 211
[Subsidiary]
(3) A loan granted to a borrower under these Regulations shall be funded at the rate of—
(a) ninety per centum of the value of the property, where such property is situated in
Nairobi; and
(b) eighty per centum of such value where the property is situated in any other area,
and the borrower shall be required to deposit the balance thereof with the Fund.
(4) Subject to this Regulation, a member of the Scheme shall be eligible for the maximum
amount of loan specified under subregulation (1) in each parliamentary term to be accessed
by the member in a maximum of two disbursements in that term.
[L.N. 168/2015, r. 2, L.N. 46/2020, rr. 2, 3.]
Repayment of loan.
13. (1) A loan granted under these Regulations shall be fully repaid at the end of the term
of that Parliament.
(2) Where a person who has been granted a loan under these Regulations ceases to be
a member of the scheme for any reason other than removal from office under legislation
made under Article 80 of the Constitution, these Regulations shall continue to apply to the
repayment of the loan and to recovery in the event of default in payment.
[L.N. 168/2015, r. 3.]
Administrative Costs.
14. (1) The Administrative costs chargeable on a loan shall be three per centum per
annum on a monthly reducing balance and this rate may be reduced from time to time at the
discretion of the Commission.
(2) A mortgage institution appointed under regulation 7 to administer the Fund may
charge an administrative cost of not more than four per centum to cover management costs.
(3) The Administrative cost charged under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Regulation shall
be met by the borrower.
(4) Despite paragraphs (1) and (2), where a person who has been granted a loan under
these Regulations ceases to be a member of the scheme for any reason other than removal
from office under legislation made under Article 80 of the Constitution and defaults in the
repayment of the loan for a period of more than three months, the interest rate on the balance
outstanding shall revert to the Kenya Banks Reference Rate as set by the Central Bank of
Kenya.
[LN 168/2015, r. 4, LN 46/2020, r. 5, LN 185/2020, r. 5.]
Lien.
15. (1) The Commission shall have a charge registered on the property financed through
a loan granted under these Regulations and shall be entitled to have its name entered in all
documents of title for such property.
(2) The borrower shall—
(a) not mortgage, charge, surrender the lease or sell or agree to sell or part with
possession of the charged property or any part thereof without the prior written
consent of the Commission;
(b) meet and pay all rates, rents, insurances and any other outgoings in respect of the
property and send the proof of such payments to the Commission; and
(c) provide a transfer deed duly signed by the borrower and a letter authorizing the
Commission to sell the property in case of default in payment.

-- 210 of 625 --

212 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) All residential properties purchased through the Fund shall be constructed of such
material as may be acceptable to the Commission.
(4) During the loan repayment period, every borrower shall—
(a) ensure that the property is used for residential purposes only;
(b) maintain the property in a satisfactory state of repair; and
(c) not alter or make any structural alteration to the property, carry out any valuation,
assessment or investigation relating to the property or title thereto, as the case
may be, without the approval of the Commission.
(5) No borrower shall be eligible for more than one loan at a time or more than a total
of two loans from the Fund.
(6) All legal documentation and disbursement of funds shall be supervised by the officer
administering the Fund.
Mortgage insurance.
16. (1) A borrower shall take out and maintain a mortgage protection policy and a fire
policy with an insurance firm approved by the Commission, the cost of which shall be paid
out of the Fund and debited in such borrower’s account.
(2) The originals of all documents relating to property financed by a loan from the Fund
shall be kept in safe custody by the officer administering the Fund.
Default in repayment.
17. The Commission may call in a loan and in default sell the charged property by
public auction or private treaty where the borrower is in breach of the terms under the loan
agreement or the covenant contained in the charge of the mortgage instrument.
Administration of the Fund.
18. (1) The officer administering the Fund shall—
(a) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(b) utilize the administrative costs accruing thereto to defray operating expenses, and
may impose any reasonable restriction or other requirements concerning such use;
(c) cause to be kept, books of accounts and other books and records in relation to the
Fund and for all loans financed from the Fund;
(d) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial
year and within three (3) months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts
relating to the Fund, prepared and signed by him specifying the income of the
Fund and showing the expenditure incurred from the Fund, in such details as the
Commission may from time to time direct in accordance with the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
(e) furnish such additional information as may be required for the purpose of
examination and audit by the Auditor-General; and
(f) designate and appoint such staff as may be necessary to assist him in the
administration of the Fund and may require such staff to carry out such inspections
as may be necessary to verify any information submitted under these Regulations.

-- 211 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 213
[Subsidiary]
(2) Every statement of account prepared under this regulation shall include details of the
balances between the assets and liabilities of the Fund and shall indicate the financial status
of the Fund as at the end of the financial year concerned.
[L.N. 46/2020, r. 6, L.N. 185/2020, r. 6.]
Responsibilities of mortgage institution.
19. The responsibilities of the mortgage institution, if any, appointed under these
Regulations shall be—
(a) to operate individual accounts for each borrower, which shall provide details of
recoveries of the loan;
(b) to charge security on properties acquired through loans from the Fund to protect
the interests of the Fund and act as custodian of such charges;
(c) to disburse cheques for newly approved loans to various vendors, after the
necessary documentation is completed by the Committee;
(d) to pay all outgoings and issue demand notices where necessary to members
through the officer administering the Fund;
(e) upon repayment of the loan, interest and other expenses which may be
outstanding, to discharge the charge and release the security documents to the
borrower; and
(f) upon default, to call in the loan and on behalf of the Commission sell the charged
property by public auction or private treaty, in which event the Fund shall meet
any shortfall between the loan outstanding and the proceeds of sale.
Supplementary terms.
20. (1) These Regulations shall be supplemented by such terms as may, from time to time,
be detailed in the application form supplied by the Commission and in the contract between
the mortgage institution and the Commission.
(2) Subject to these Regulations, the Commission shall issue guidelines on—
(a) the purchase and development of land and residential properties under these
Regulations;
(b) the utilization of surplus Funds for the purchase and development of land and
residential property under these Regulations; and
(c) such other matters as may be necessary for the proper management and
administration of the Fund.
Repeal of L.N. 46/2008.
21. The Government Financial Management (Parliamentary Mortgage Scheme Fund)
Regulations, 2008 (LN 46/2008) are repealed.

-- 212 of 625 --

214 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 24(4)
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (ROADS ANNUITY FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Capital of the Fund.
5. Object and purpose.
6. Sources of the funds.
7. Payments into the Fund.
8. Conditions for payment out of the Fund.
9. Responsibilities of contracting authorities with respect to applications for
payments out of the Fund.
10. Withholding of payments.
11. Applications for payments out of the Fund.
12. Establishment and composition of Oversight Committee.
13. Functions of the Committee.
14. Officer Administering the Fund.
15. Powers of Officer Administering the Fund.
16. Secretariat support for Officer Administering the Fund.
17. Account of the Fund.
18. Overdrawn accounts.
19. Withdrawals from the Fund.
20. Financial and procurement Regulations.
21. Invoices.
22. Miscellaneous disclosures.
23. Offences.
24. Review of performances of the Fund.
25. Winding up of the Fund.

-- 213 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 215
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (ROADS ANNUITY FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 36/2015, L.N. 8/2019]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Roads Annuity
Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. (1) In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"annuity payment obligations" means the funding requirements included in approved
estimates of expenditure for the purposes of the Fund during a given financial year;
"Cabinet Secretary” means the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to
finance;
"Committee” means the Oversight Committee established under regulation 12;
"contracting authority" means either the Kenya National Highways Authority (KeNHA),
the Kenya Rural Roads Authority (KeRRA) or the Kenya Urban Highways Authority (KURA) as
defined in the project agreements under the Annuity Programme;
“Independent Engineer” means a suitably qualified and experienced professional engineer
or engineering firm hired by the contracting authority, with the approval of the contractor,
to certify that the contractor has met all obligations for which payment is claimed under the
project agreement;
"Fund" means the Road Annuity Fund established under regulation 3;
"Officer Administering the Fund" means the Principal Secretary for the time being
responsible for matters relating to roads;
"operational expenditure" means moneys included in the approved annual budget of the
Fund dedicated to meeting the routine administrative costs of the Secretariat;
"penalties" mean amounts payable by or recoverable from contractors or the contracting
authority on account of non-performance of contractual obligations as stipulated in project
agreements; and
“project” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Private Partnership
Act (Cap. 430);
“project agreement” means the agreement executed between a contracting authority and
a private entity for the development and maintenance of a road project under the Annuity
Programme.
"surplus funds" means any money held within the accounts of the Fund in excess of 1.2
times of the projected revenues and expenditure, on a quarterly basis rolled a year forward.
(2) For the purposes of these Regulations, "Annuity Programme" means the Road
Annuity Programme approved by Cabinet on the 10th March, 2015, under which the national
government shall—
(a) identify a maximum of ten thousand kilometre priority roads distributed across the
country;
(b) procure long term contracts for design, finance, construction and maintenance
of identified roads under a public private partnership arrangement within the
meaning of the Public Private Partnership Act (Cap. 430), with payments linked to
the completion of roads and performance based maintenance; and

-- 214 of 625 --

216 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) pay for the services delivered by the private contractors through the normal budget
process.
[L.N. 8/2019, r. 2.]
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a fund to be known as the Roads Annuity Fund which shall be
operated under the budgeting, accounting, reporting and auditing framework of the Act.
Capital of the Fund.
4. The initial capital of the Fund shall be five hundred million shillings appropriated by
Parliament in the 2014/15 financial year.
Object and purpose.
5. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide funds to meet the national
government's annuity payment obligations for the development and maintenance of roads
under the Annuity Programme.
Sources of the funds.
6. The Fund shall consist of—
(a) money appropriated by Parliament for the purpose of the Fund;
(b) money allocated from fuel taxes as assigned by an Act of Parliament;
(c) income from investments of any balances in the Fund;
(d) grants, donations or other bequests made to the Fund;
(e) money paid to the Fund from any other source as may from time to time be
approved by the Cabinet Secretary.
Payments into the Fund.
7. (1) For the purposes of the Annuity Programme, Parliament shall, in each financial year,
appropriate an amount equal to the approved expenditure requirements for that financial year
which shall be paid into the Fund.
(2) Transfers of the funds referred to in paragraph (1) of this regulation into the Fund's
account shall be effected on a monthly basis.
(3) The Officer Administering the Fund shall ensure that sufficient funds are available
in the bank account, in accordance with the funding obligations set out in the project
agreements.
(4) For the purposes of paragraph (3) of this regulation, the Officer Administering the
Fund shall ensure that a minimum of five per centum of the annual annuity obligations or two
billion shillings, whichever is lower, is maintained in the annuity payment obligations bank
account.
(5) The earnings of, or accruals to the Fund shall be retained in the Fund, and shall be
spent only for the purposes for which the Fund is established.
Conditions for payment out of the Fund.
8. (1) Money shall only be paid out of the Fund where—
(a) an invoice has been issued to the contracting authority with respect to the
requested payment;
(b) the invoice is in respect of an existing project agreement under the Annuity
Programme; and

-- 215 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 217
[Subsidiary]
(c) a certificate of the accounting officer confirming that the annuity payments are
due and issued in accordance with the terms of the project agreement has been
provided by a contractor under that project agreement.
(2) Moneys may additionally be paid out of the Fund where such payments—
(a) relate to expenditures under the Annuity Programme that did not form part of the
approved budget for the financial year; or
(b) have been recommended by the Officer Administering the Fund and approved by
the Committee.
(c) relate to the use or investment of surplus funds in the manner directed by the
Cabinet Secretary.
[L.N. 8/2019, r. 3.]
(3) For purposes of paragraph (2) of this regulation, a supplementary budget shall be
prepared by the Officer Administering the Fund and approved in accordance with regulation
7, provided that disbursement under the supplementary budget shall comply with the
requirements of paragraph (1), of this regulation.
Responsibilities of contracting authorities with respect to applications for payments out of
the Fund.
9. A contracting authority shall only request for payments from the Fund where—
(a) the project to be financed under the Annuity Programme has been procured in
accordance with the Public Private Partnership Act (Cap. 430);
(b) the project to be financed was included in the estimates of revenue and expenditure
approved by the Cabinet Secretary;
(c) the contacting authority ascertains that the Independent Engineer has in
accordance with the terms of the respective project agreement certified that the
contractor has met all obligations for which payment is claimed under the project
agreement; and
(d) the requirements of regulation 8 are met.
(e) the application is related to an approved use or investment of Funds declared as
surplus funds.
[L.N. 8/2019, r. 4.]
Withholding of payments.
10. The Officer Administering the Fund may withhold payments due and owing to an
applicant where—
(a) a contracting authority provides information justifying the proposed withholding;
and
(b) an Independent Engineer supports that the proposed withholding is justifiable.
Applications for payments out of the Fund.
11. (1) Applications for payment out of the Fund shall be made by a contracting authority
in a format prescribed by the Officer Administering the Fund at least twenty one days before
the due date.
(2) Any applications for payment made under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be
supported by documents required under these Regulations which shall include—
(a) the name and address of the payee;

-- 216 of 625 --

218 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) the bank account details of the payee;
(c) an invoice from the contractor;
(d) any certificates required from the contracting authority and the Independent
Engineer under the terms of the project agreement;
(e) a certified payment voucher with all the certificates filled and signed for; and
(f) any other information as may be prescribed by the Officer Administering the Fund.
(3) Any application under these Regulations shall be signed by the chief executive officer
of a contracting authority.
Establishment and composition of Oversight Committee.
12. There is established a committee to be known as Oversight Committee for the Fund
which shall consist of—
(a) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to finance, who shall be the
chairperson of the Committee;
(b) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to roads, who shall be the
Secretary to the Committee;
(c) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to planning;
(d) the Attorney-General or his representative;
(e) a representative of the Kenya Bankers Association; and
(f) two other persons being eminent professionals appointed by the Cabinet Secretary
drawn from the engineering, accounting or legal professions.
Functions of the Committee.
13. (1) The functions of the Committee shall be to—
(a) inform the Cabinet Secretary on the funding requirements of the Fund;
(b) adopt the estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund and
recommend them to the Cabinet Secretary for approval;
(c) ensure that the annual estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fund include
cumulative Annuity Programme commitments for the financial year under review;
(d) ensure that only the projects included in the Annuity Programme are promoted for
funding under these Regulations;
(e) inform the Cabinet Secretary on the amounts and timing for the fund transfers into
the Fund
(f) make recommendations for the use or investment of surplus funds to the Cabinet
Secretary;
(g) advise the Cabinet Secretary on the sources of funds for the Fund;
(h) adopt the financial statements prepared by the Officer Administering the Fund
before submission to the Auditor- General; and
(i) adopt the non-financial reports of the Fund and submit them to the Cabinet
Secretary.
(2) Where the projected revenues and expenditure of the Fund show that the Fund shall
retain funds in excess of 1.2 times of the total projected obligations of the Fund, over the

-- 217 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 219
[Subsidiary]
immediately succeeding 12 month period, the Committee may, on the advice of the Officer
Administering the Fund, declare the existence of a surplus in the Fund.
(3) Subject to paragraph (2), surpluses may be paid out of the Fund into the National
Exchequer Account, subject to the recommendation of the Committee and authorization of
the Cabinet Secretary on the use of surpluses:
Provided the Fund remains adequately funded to meet the national government's annuity
payment obligations.
(4) In the event that the Committee is yet to be constituted, or is unable to obtain quorum
for whatever reason to allow them to carry out the functions outlined in paragraph (1), the
Cabinet Secretary may undertake the functions of the Committee until such a time that the
Committee shall be properly constituted.
[L.N. 8/2019, r. 5.]
Officer Administering the Fund.
14. (1) The Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to roads shall be the Officer
Administering the Fund.
(2) The functions of the Officer Administering the Fund shall be to—
(a) supervise and control the administering of the Fund;
(b) prepare estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund relating to
Annuity Programme obligations and operational expenses and submit it to the
Committee for adoption;
(bb) advise the Committee on the quantum of surplus funds, if any, based on the annual
projected estimates of the revenue and expenditure of the Fund and the annuity
programme obligations and operational expenses.
(c) cause to be established proper systems of control and oversight under the
provisions of the Act;
(d) advise and consult the Committee on matters relating to the administering of the
Fund;
(e) keep and maintain complete financial records of all projects comprised in the
Annuity Programme;
(f) advise the Committee on trends and projections relating to the financing
requirements of the Annuity Programme;
(g) advise and consult with the Cabinet Secretary on matters relating to the
administration of the Fund as may, from time to time, be necessary;
(h) prepare the non-financial performance report of the Fund and submit it to the
Committee for adoption;
(i) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records relating to
the Fund and the activities financed under the Fund;
(j) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of account relating to
the fund in such forms the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board established
under section 192 of the Act may from time to time prescribe in accordance with the
Act, a copy of which statement of account shall be filed with the National Treasury;
and
(k) furnish any additional information which is proper and sufficient for the proper
discharge of the mandate of the Auditor-General.

-- 218 of 625 --

220 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) The Officer Administering the Fund shall comply with the ordinary budget cycle in the
preparation of estimates for the Fund.
(4) The Officer Administering the Fund shall submit estimates of revenue and expenditure
to the Cabinet Secretary by the 15th September of the preceding financial year for approval.
[L.N. 8/2019, r. 6.]
Powers of Officer Administering the Fund.
15. The Officer Administering the Fund shall have power to—
(a) access any project related data that he or she may need from contracting authorities
in furtherance of his or her functions;
(b) call for any additional information with respect to requests for payments out of the
Fund; and
(c) issue financial management guidelines relating to the Annuity Programme.
Secretariat support for Officer Administering the Fund.
16. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund shall designate a secretariat to support the
operations of the Fund.
(2) The Secretariat shall consist of such staff as the Cabinet Secretary may, in consultation
with the Officer Administering the Fund, consider necessary for the proper performance of
the functions of the Officer Administering the Fund under these Regulations.
Account of the Fund.
17. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund shall cause an account in the name of the Fund
to be maintained for the Fund in a bank within the Republic of Kenya in line with section 28
of the Act and any Regulations made thereunder.
(2) All monies payable into the Fund shall be received into the bank account of the Fund.
(3) The Fund's accounts shall be operated by the Officer Administering the Fund and two
other persons nominated from the state department responsible for roads and the Fund's
secretariat.
(4) The Officer Administering the Fund may open and maintain other accounts for the
following purposes—
(a) the payment of Annuity Programme obligations;
(b) the payment of operational expenditure; and
(c) receiving penalties paid by contractors for contractors non-performance.
(5) Subject to regulation 10, the Officer Administering the Fund shall ensure that the
operational expenditure does not, within any given financial year, exceed zero point one
per centum of the annual Annuity Programme obligations, or one hundred million shillings,
whichever is lesser.
(6) The cap under paragraph (5) of this regulation shall be subject to periodic review by
the Cabinet Secretary.
Overdrawn accounts.
18. The Officer Administering the Fund shall ensure that the accounts of the Fund are
not overdrawn.

-- 219 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 221
[Subsidiary]
Withdrawals from the Fund.
19. (1) Withdrawals from the Fund shall only be for purposes of payment of approved
annuity payment obligations approved use or investment of surplus funds and operational
expenditure of the Fund.
(2) The records of expenditure relating to the Fund shall be kept and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and Regulations made thereunder.
[L.N. 8/2019, r. 7.]
Financial and procurement Regulations.
20. The Fund shall be governed by all relevant financial and procurement laws and
Regulations as applicable.
Invoices.
21. (1) Where a contractor submits an invoice to the contracting Invoices. authority with
a request for payment, the contracting authority shall process and submit the same to the
officer administering the Fund within ten days from the date of receipt thereof.
(2) Applications for payments out of the Fund that meet all the requirement of these
Regulations shall be settled within twenty one days from the date of receipt of the application
by the Officer Administering the Fund.
Miscellaneous disclosures.
22. The Officer Administering the Fund shall—
(a) an annual basis, publish on the website of the ministry responsible for matters
relating to roads the estimates prepared of Annuity programme funding and
payment obligations for the forthcoming financial year; and
(b) on a quarterly basis, publish on the website of the ministry responsible for matters
relating to roads the balance of funds held in the account designated for annuity
payment obligations.
Offences.
23. The provisions of the Act relating to offences by public officers, including financial
misconduct, shall apply to these Regulations.
Review of performances of the Fund.
24. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall at the elapse of ten years from the date of
commencement of these Regulations cause a review to be conducted on the performance of
the Fund in accordance with the requirements of the Act and Regulations made thereunder.
(2) The review shall determine whether the Fund has met the objectives for which it was
established.
(3) The report on the review shall be submitted to the Cabinet for approval.
Winding up of the Fund.
25. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may wind up the Fund with the approval of the National
Assembly where the Cabinet Secretary considers that the Fund has successfully completed
the specific objectives for which it was created.
(2) On the winding up of the Fund—
(a) the Officer Administering the Fund shall call on the contracting authorities to
request from the respective contractors or their agents for financial statements to
confirm any valid outstanding obligations and commitments for payment;

-- 220 of 625 --

222 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) the Officer Administering the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund
into the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government;
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from the funds of the
national government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the
National Assembly;
(d) assets other than cash of the Fund shall be transferred to the Ministry for the time
being responsible for matters relating to roads.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament and
to the Auditor-General for audit within nine months from the date of the decision to wind
up the Fund.

-- 221 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 223
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (STATE OFFICERS
HOUSE MORTGAGE SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Provision
1. Citation and commencement.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Objects and purpose of the Fund.
5. Capital of the Fund.
6. Advisory Committee of the Fund.
7. Management of the Fund and Scheme.
8. Purpose of loan.
9. Disbursement of loans for development.
10. Application for loan.
11. Leasehold property.
12. Repayment of loan.
13. Interest on loan.
14. Lien under loan property.
15. Insurance in respect of loan property.
16. Safe Custody of Documents.
17. Protection of Government interest.
18. Default in repayment.
19. Administration of the Fund.
20. Transfer or sale of loan property.
21. Duties of mortgage institution.
22. Financing or development Partnership.
23. Partnership with other schemes.
24. Management costs.
25. Miscellaneous.
26. Amendment to Regulations.
SCHEDULE — SCHEDULE

-- 222 of 625 --

224 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (STATE OFFICERS
HOUSE MORTGAGE SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 23/2015]
Citation and commencement.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (State Officers
House Mortgage Scheme Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"borrower" means a person in receipt of a loan out of the Fund;
"state officer” shall have the meaning ascribed in Article 260 of the Constitution and shall
not include a state officer who is covered by any public housing mortgage scheme;
"equity release" means a loan that allows the home owner to access equity in his or her
home without having to sell it for purposes of improving it;
"committee" means the Advisory Committee of the Fund established under regulation 6
of these Regulations;
“financial year" means a period of twelve months ending on the 30th June of each year;
"Fund" means the State Officers House Mortgage Scheme Fund established under
regulation 3 of these Regulations;
"mortgage finance company" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Banking
Act (Cap. 488);
"officer administering the Fund" means a person designated as such under section 24(5)
of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A); and
"tenant purchase institution" means a company incorporated in Kenya which has not less
than twenty years experience in operation of tenant purchase loan schemes for over two
thousand housing units at one moment.
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is hereby established a fund to be known as the State Officers House Mortgage
Scheme Fund.
Objects and purpose of the Fund.
4. The objective and purpose for which the Fund is established shall be to provide a loan
scheme for the purchase or development of property by the State Officers.
Capital of the Fund.
5. (1) The capital of the fund shall consist of the initial capital of one billion shillings
appropriated by Parliament in the 2014/2015 financial year and such other funds as may be
voted for the purposes of the Fund in subsequent financial years.
(2) All monies that shall be paid into the account operated by the officer administering
the Fund.
Advisory Committee of the Fund.
6. (1) There is established an Advisory Committee of the Fund within the National
Treasury which shall consist of the—
(a) Director of Administration;

-- 223 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 225
[Subsidiary]
(b) Director of Budgetary Supply;
(c) Director of Human Resources; and
(d) Director of Fiscal Decentralization.
(2) The functions of the Advisory Committee of the Fund shall be to—
(a) approve all housing development and financing proposals;
(b) approve criteria for the beneficiaries of the Fund; and
(c) such other duty as may be directed by the Cabinet Secretary for the purposes of the
proper management of the Fund.
(3) The advisory committee shall meet at least four times in a year.
(4) The officer administering the Fund shall be the Secretary of the committee.
(5) The members of the committee shall elect a chairman from amongst themselves.
(6) The quorum for a meeting of the committee shall be the chairman and two other
members.
(7) The chairman shall convene and preside at meetings of the committee and in the
absence of the chairman, by a member of the committee, elected by other members present
in the meeting.
(8) The decision of the committee shall be by simple majority and in the case of a tie, the
chairman shall have a casting vote.
Management of the Fund and Scheme.
7. (1) Notwithstanding paragraph 6 (1), the Cabinet Secretary may appoint a committee
or board of an existing house mortgage scheme fund in the public service to manage the State
Officers House Mortgage Scheme Fund.
(2) The committee or board in sub-paragraph (1) shall be deemed to have taken the role
of the Advisory Committee.
(3) The committee or board appointed under paragraph 7(1), shall conduct its affairs under
the Public Finance Management (State Officers House Mortgage Scheme Fund) Regulations,
2015 to manage the scheme.
Purpose of loan.
8. A loan granted under these Regulations shall be solely utilized for the purchase or
development of residential property for the occupation of the borrower or equity release for
improvement of the residential house.
Disbursement of loans for development.
9. (1) A loan granted to a state officer who is in possession of a title deed to the land on
which the development is to be carried out, shall be at the discretion of the Committee.
(2) The first disbursement shall be based on twenty five per cent of the cost of
construction.
Provided that the cost of construction shall not exceed the maximum funding due to the
borrower under these Regulations or twice the open market value of the land on which the
residential property is proposed to be constructed, whichever is less.
(3) A loan granted under these Regulations shall be funded at the rate of ninety percent of
the value of the property but shall not exceed the maximum loan threshold set in the Schedule
and this shall be based on the ability to pay, and repaid by check off system.

-- 224 of 625 --

226 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(4) The subsequent disbursements shall be based on the rate of completion of the various
phases of development as certified by a valuer, registered as such under Valuers Act (Cap. 532),
at the cost of the borrower.
Application for loan.
10. (1) A state officer who wishes to apply for a loan from the Fund shall make such
application to the officer administering the Fund in such manner as the advisory committee
may prescribe.
(2) An application for a loan for construction purposes shall be accompanied by the
following documents where applicable—
(a) copies of the designs of the proposed residential property duly approved by the
county authority within whose area it is to be situated;
(b) priced bills of quantities in respect of the proposed development;
(c) an official search of the title to the property intended to be purchased;
(d) a certified copy of the sale agreement relating to the property;
(e) proof of availability of ten percent of the value of the property; and
(f) any other document that the committee may require for the purpose of
determining the application.
(3) The borrower shall bear the costs of stamp duty, transfer fees, legal fees and other
related charges.
(4) The balance to the full value of the property, the stamp duty, the transfer fee and other
related charges shall be paid by the borrower into the Fund Account.
(5) The Advisory Committee may, where it deems appropriate, recommend the
appointment of an advocate to act on its behalf in respect of transactions relating to the
property under these Regulations.
Leasehold property.
11. Where the property intended to be purchased through a loan from the Fund is
leasehold property, no loan shall be granted unless the expiry date of such lease is at least
forty-five years from the date the loan is granted.
Repayment of loan.
12. (1) A loan granted under these Regulations shall be repayable within a period of
twenty years or before the borrower attains the age of seventy years, whichever is the earlier.
(2) A state officer who is appointed at the age of seventy years or above shall be required
to repay the loan for the duration of the state officer's appointment.
(3) A borrower may give prior authority in writing for his pension dues to be utilized to
clear any outstanding debt in case the borrower retires before fully repaying the loan.
(4) Where the property is developed by the Fund for the purposes of tenant purchase, the
borrower shall pay a deposit often per centum of the value of the property and shall subject
to paragraph 5 be granted a loan of the remaining ninety per centum to be repaid monthly
and in accordance with these Regulations.
(5) The loan granted to a borrower under paragraph (4) shall not exceed the maximum
loan indicated in the Schedule.

-- 225 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 227
[Subsidiary]
Interest on loan.
13. (1) The interest payable on a loan shall be at the rate of at least three per centum
per annum on a monthly reducing balance or such other rate as may from time to time be
determined by the committee.
(2) The interest charged under this regulation shall be paid by the borrower.
Lien under loan property.
14. (1) The Fund shall register a charge on any property financed through a loan granted
under these Regulations and such charge shall impose an obligation on the chargee—
(a) not to mortgage, charge, surrender the lease, or sell or agree to sell or part
with possession of the charged property or part thereof without the prior written
consent of the Committee;
(b) to meet and pay all rates, rents, insurance and any other outgoings in respect of
the property and send the proof of such payments to the committee; and
(c) to provide a transfer deed duly signed by the borrower and a letter authorizing the
Fund to sell the property in case of default in payment.
(2) All residential properties purchased or developed through the Fund shall be of such
standards and constructed of such materials the Committee may approve.
(3) During the tenant purchase or loan repayment period, every borrower shall—
(a) ensure that the property is used for residential purposes only;
(b) maintain the property in a satisfactory state or repair; and
(c) make no extension or any structural alteration to the property or title thereto
without the prior approval of the Committee.
(4) The committee shall grant only one loan or one house to a State officer.
(5) Notwithstanding paragraph (4) the Committee shall grant another loan or a house to
a state officer in event of change of status or maximum threshold, as long as there shall not
be any outstanding loan repayment due to the Fund.
(6) Where the spouse of a State officer is also a State officer, the granting of a loan or
house to one spouse shall not bar the other spouse from benefiting from the Fund.
(7) All legal documentation and disbursement of funds shall be supervised by the officer
administering the Fund.
Insurance in respect of loan property.
15. (1) A borrower shall take and maintain a life insurance policy and a fire insurance
policy with an insurance company approved by the committee, the cost of which shall be paid
out of the Fund and debited in the borrower's account.
(2) Every borrower of a house under construction shall take a mortgage protection cover
for the provisional sale price of the property.
Safe Custody of Documents.
16. The originals of all documents relating to property financed by a loan from the Fund
shall be kept in safe custody by the officer administering the Fund.
Protection of Government interest.
17. The Advisory Committee shall be entitled to do everything lawful and necessary to
protect the Government's interest in the property in respect of which a loan is granted.

-- 226 of 625 --

228 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Default in repayment.
18. (1) Where a borrower defaults in the repayment of the loan for a period of three
consecutive months the advisory committee shall reposes and sell the property to another
deserving state officer.
(2) Where a borrower ceases to be a state officer before full loan repayment, the advisory
committee may, in its discretion, allow the borrower to continue to repay the loan on the same
terms as set out in these Regulations provided that when the borrower defaults in a period of
four months the outstanding loan shall revert to prevailing commercial interest rate.
(3) Notwithstanding these Regulations, where a borrower leaves service on disciplinary
grounds or resigns before serving for the contract period, the Committee may grant the
borrower a maximum period of four months to repay the full outstanding loan or permit the
borrower to repay the outstanding loan at the prevailing market rate and on such other terms
and conditions as the Committee may from time to time prescribe.
(4) Where the commercial rate is applicable, and the borrower is in default for a period
of four months, the Fund may call in the loan and sell the charged property by public auction
or private treaty.
Administration of the Fund.
19. The officer administering the Fund shall—
(a) open and manage a bank account for the Fund;
(b) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(c) utilize the interest accruing thereto to defray operating expenses, and may impose
any reasonable restriction or other requirement concerning such use;
(d) cause to be kept books of account and other records in relation to the Fund; and
(e) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to
the Fund, in such details as the National Treasury may from time to time direct in
accordance with the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A).
Transfer or sale of loan property.
20. No person shall sell or in any way transfer any property acquired through the Fund
under these Regulations unless—
(a) a period of not less than eight years has expired from the date—
(i) the final payment of the full purchase price of the property together with
such interest as may be due is made; or
(ii) the final repayment of the full loan advanced by the Fund together with such
interest as maybe due is made.
(b) the sale or transfer has been approved by the Advisory Committee.
Duties of mortgage institution.
21. Where the Advisory Committee approves the appointment of a tenant purchase
institution or a mortgage finance company to administer the Fund, the institution shall—
(a) operate individual accounts for each borrower and provide details of recoveries of
the loan;
(b) charge security on properties acquired through loans from the fund to protect the
interests of the Fund and act as a custodian of such charges;

-- 227 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 229
[Subsidiary]
(c) disburse cheques or transfer funds for newly approved loans to borrowers after the
necessary documentation is completed by the Committee;
(d) pay all outgoing and issue demand notices to defaulting borrowers through the
officer administering the Fund;
(e) upon repayment of the loan, interest and other expenses which may be outstanding
discharge the charge and release the security documents to the borrowers; and
(f) perform such other duties as may be assigned to it from time to time by the
Committee.
Financing or development Partnership.
22. The Fund may enter into a viable financing or development partnership with a legal
entity f0r the purposes of implementing the objectives of the Fund.
Partnership with other schemes.
23. The Scheme may enter into viable management partnership with a scheme from any
other public body.
Management costs.
24. The Fund or, where applicable, the tenant purchase institution or mortgage finance
company referred to under regulation 21, may charge an interest of not more than two per
centum per annum of the value of the loan to cover its management costs.
Miscellaneous.
25. These Regulations shall be supplemented by such requirements as may be detailed
in the loan application form supplied by the Fund and by the contract between the Fund and
the borrower.
Amendment to Regulations.
26. The Advisory Committee may from time to time recommend to the Cabinet Secretary
any amendment to these Regulations.
SCHEDULE
Beneficiaries Threshold
Cabinet Secretaries
Attorney-General
Secretary to the Cabinet
Chief of the Kenya Defence Forces
Governor of Counties
Up to forty million shillings
Principals Secretaries
Members of Independent Commissions
Holders of Independent Offices (Controller of Budget, Auditor-
General)
Up to thirty five million shillings

-- 228 of 625 --

230 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Beneficiaries Threshold
Vice-Commander of the Defence Forces
Commander of Kenya Air Force
Commander of Kenya Navy
Director-General National Intelligence Service
Inspector-General of Police
Director of Public Prosecution
Deputy Governors
Up to thirty million shillings
Deputy Constitutional Office Holders
Registrar of Political Parties
Other State Officers
Chief Executive Officers of Government Agencies
Up to twenty five million shillings

-- 229 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 231
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (STATE OFFICERS AND
PUBLIC OFFICERS MOTOR CAR LOAN SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Object and Purpose of the Fund.
5. Capital of the Fund.
6. Sources of the Fund.
7. Expenditure of the Fund.
8. Guidelines on the Fund.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
9. Establishment and composition of the Advisory Board.
10. Functions of the Advisory Board.
11. Car loan threshold.
12. Loan application procedure.
13. Eligibility criteria.
14. Insurance in respect of motor car loan.
15. Conditions for disbursement of Funds.
16. Loan repayment.
17. Loan interest.
18. Management cost.
19. Responsibilities of the financial institution.
20. Chief Executive Officer.
21. Secretariat of the Fund.
22. Retention of receipts.
23. Application of Government Regulations and procedures.
24. Administration of the Fund.
PART VI – FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
25. Fund Bank Account.
26. Withdrawal of funds from the Fund.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
27. Offences and penalties.
28. Winding-up of the Fund.
29. Supplementary requirements.
30. Amendments to these Regulations.
31. Persons to whom these Regulations shall apply.
SCHEDULE — LOAN THRESHOLD FOR STATE OFFICERS AND OTHER PUBLIC
OFFICERS

-- 230 of 625 --

232 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (STATE OFFICERS AND
PUBLIC OFFICERS MOTOR CAR LOAN SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 155/2015]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (State Officers and
Public officers Car Loan Scheme Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Accounting Officer" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Accounting Standards Board” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public
Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Advisory Board” means the Loans Management Advisory Board established under
regulation 9;
"beneficiary" means State Officers and Public Officers working in the National Government
as prescribed in Regulation 31;
“borrower” means a person in receipt of a loan out of the Fund;
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters
relating to finance;
"Chief Executive Officer” means the Chief Executive Officer of the Fund appointed under
regulation 20;
"commercial use" means any motorised road vehicle, that by its type of construction and
equipment is designed for, and capable of transporting, goods and services for payment;
"financial institution" means any institution referred to in regulation 19 identified for the
purposes of providing financial services to the Fund;
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
“Fund” means the State Officers and Public officers Car Loan Scheme Fund established
under regulation 3;
“Motor car” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Traffic Act (Cap. 403);
“Officer administering the Fund” means a person designated as such under section 24(5)
of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
“Public Officer” means an officer employed in the National Government or the Public
Service;
“revenue” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
“State Officers” has the meaning assigned to it under Article 260 of the Constitution but
shall not include a state officer who is covered by any public motor car loan scheme; and
“value of the loan” the initial loan granted to a beneficiary or any outstanding loan balance
at any given time before full loan repayment.

-- 231 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 233
[Subsidiary]
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the State Officers and Public officers Car
Loan Scheme Fund.
Object and Purpose of the Fund.
4. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to—
(a) provide a car loan facility to state officers and public officers of the national
government to purchase a motor car as prescribed in these Regulations; and
(b) cater for administrative expenses of the Fund;
Capital of the Fund.
5. The initial capital of the Fund shall be Kenya shillings one billion appropriated by
Parliament in the financial year 2014/15 and additional capital of the Fund shall be made in
the subsequent financial years' budgets.
Sources of the Fund.
6. There shall be paid into the Fund—
(a) monies appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Fund;
(b) income from investments made by the Fund;
(c) grants, donations, bequests or other gifts made to the Fund; and
(d) monies from any other source approved by the Cabinet Secretary.
Expenditure of the Fund.
7. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in pursuance of the object and purpose for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
budget estimates prepared by the officer administering the Fund and shall be recommended
by the Advisory Board for approval by the Cabinet Secretary at the beginning of the financial
year to which they relate.
(3) Any revision of the approved budget estimates, and of any cost estimate, shall be
referred to the Advisory Board and the Cabinet Secretary for approval.
Guidelines on the Fund.
8. The Officer administering the Fund, in consultation with the Advisory Board shall
develop guidelines for the proper management of Fund for approval by the Cabinet Secretary.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment and composition of the Advisory Board.
9. (1) There is established an Advisory Board of the Fund.
(2) The Advisory Board shall comprise—
(a) the Principal Secretary for the National Treasury or his or her nominee who shall
not be below Job Group "T", who shall be the Chairperson;
(b) the Principal Secretary of the State Department responsible for Public Service
Management or his or her nominee who shall not be below Job Group R;

-- 232 of 625 --

234 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) the Principal Secretary of the State Department responsible for Transport or his or
her nominee drawn from the relevant technical department dealing with matters
of motor car and shall not be below Job Group R;
(d) the Chief Executive Officer or Secretary, Salaries and Remuneration Commission
or his or her nominee who shall not be below the level of a director;
(e) the Chief Executive Officer or Secretary, Public Service Commission or his or her
nominee who shall not be below Job Group "R"; and
(f) two persons nominated by the Principal Secretary for the National Treasury who
shall not be below Job Group R, from the Directorates of—
(i) Budget, Financial and Economic Affairs; and
(ii) Administrative Services.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer of the Fund shall be the Secretary to the Advisory Board.
(4) The terms and conditions of service of members of the Advisory Board and the
Secretariat shall be as determined by the Cabinet Secretary in consultation with the Public
Service Commission and the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
Functions of the Advisory Board.
10. The functions of the Advisory Board shall be to—
(a) process and approve loans in accordance with the existing terms and conditions of
borrowing;
(b) liaise with the financial institution to set up a Fund for the disbursement of the
loans;
(c) oversee the management of the Fund;
(d) monitor and evaluate the performance of the Fund;
(e) approve annual work programmes and procurement plans for the Fund;
(f) recommend the investment of any surplus funds not immediately required in
securities approved by the National Treasury, for the purposes of realizing the
objects and purpose for which the Fund is established;
(g) cause to be kept all proper books and records of account of the income, expenditure,
assets and liabilities of the Fund;
(h) receive any gifts, donations, grants or endowments made to the Fund;
(i) consider and recommend approval of the financial statements to the officer
administering the Fund;
(j) recommend as when required the procurement of a financial institution to
administer the Fund on its behalf;
(k) perform any other functions that are ancillary to the objects and purpose for which
the Fund is established; and
(l) determine its own procedures for conducting its business.
Car loan threshold.
11. The maximum loan each beneficiary shall be eligible to, is set out in the Schedule in
these Regulations or as may be determined the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, from
time to time.

-- 233 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 235
[Subsidiary]
Loan application procedure.
12. (1) An application for a loan under these Regulations shall be accompanied by the
following documents where appropriate—
(a) duly filled application Form by the applicant;
(b) a certified copy of the National Identify Card or Passport;
(c) certified copies of pay-slips for the immediate last three months by the respective
accounting officers;
(d) a certified copy of the sale agreement relating to the motor car;
(e) a certified copy of the log book;
(f) a non-refundable application fees of one thousand shillings or as determined from
time to time by the officer administering the Fund; and
(g) a valuation report on the motor car.
(2) For the purposes of these Regulations, the value of a new Loan application vehicle shall
be as quoted on the invoice from the supplier whereas the procedure value of a used vehicle
shall be as determined by a report from the Automobile Association of Kenya, a Government
Department dealing with similar matters or a certified automobile valuer registered in Kenya.
(3) For the purposes of these Regulations, a loan shall not be given to a beneficiary to
purchase a used vehicle that is more than eight years old from the date of manufacture or as
may be determined from time to time.
(4) The applicant shall bear the cost of valuation, registration and other legal fees.
Eligibility criteria.
13. The officer administering the Fund shall use the following eligibility criteria when
evaluating a loan application—
(a) first in first out principle of loan processing;
(b) applicable loan threshold for each grade of the beneficiary;
(c) compliance with the provisions of regulation 12;
(d) ability to repay the loan within existing statutes and the stipulated time;
(e) an undertaking by the beneficiary that the motor car shall jointly be registered
and owned for the period of the loan by the National Treasury on behalf of the
Government of Kenya and the beneficiary until the loan is repaid in full by the
beneficiary;
(f) an undertaking to meet such costs for the purpose of securing a motor car
comprehensive insurance cover and pay such sum of money on or before thirty
days before the expiry of the comprehensive motor car insurance policy as may be
determined by the officer administering the Fund from time to time;
(g) no borrower shall be eligible for more than one loan at a time from the Fund within
five years; and
(h) any other conditions as may be prescribed by the officer administering the Fund.
Insurance in respect of motor car loan.
14. A borrower shall take and maintain a comprehensive motor car insurance policy with
an insurance company approved by the Advisory Board, the cost of which shall be paid out of
the Fund and debited to the borrower's account.

-- 234 of 625 --

236 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Conditions for disbursement of Funds.
15. (1) A loan approved by the Advisory Board under these Regulations shall be released
from the Fund to the bank account of the supplier or seller of the motor car.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), a person disbursing the funds shall
confirm that the beneficiary has complied with regulations 12 and 13 of these Regulations.
(3) The officer administering the Fund shall issue a caveat prohibiting the transfer of the
motor car and shall notify the Registrar of Motor Vehicles accordingly.
(4) The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall confirm in writing to the officer administering the
Fund, that a caveat issued under paragraph (3) has been entered and noted in the appropriate
motor car file or data base in the registry of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
(5) During the loan repayment period the beneficiary shall—
(a) not lease, sell or agree to sell or part with possession of the charged motor car or any
part of the motor car without the prior written consent of the officer administering
the Fund;
(b) meet costs for the motor car comprehensive insurance cover and pay such sum of
money as may be determined by the officer administering the Fund from time to
time;
(c) ensure that the motor car is not used for commercial purposes; and
(d) maintain the motor car in a satisfactory state of repair.
(6) All legal documentation and disbursement of funds shall be supervised by the Advisory
Board.
(7) The officer administering the Fund shall be the custodian of the motor car log book
until the loan is repaid in full by the beneficiary and thereafter the Officer Administering the
Fund shall transfer the motor car log book to the beneficiary in his or her name within ninety
days after full repayment of the loan.
(8) Upon receiving the motor car log book in his or her name, the beneficiary shall sign a
discharge form confirming receipt of the motor car log book from the Officer Administering
the Fund.
Loan repayment.
16. (1) A loan advanced under these Regulations shall be repaid in full within sixty
months.
(2) The preferred method of loan repayment shall be through a check-off system or a bank
standing order by the beneficiary.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), where a state officer or public officer
leaves public service employment for whatever reason other than disciplinary grounds, the
terms of the loan shall remain in force and shall not change for the life of the loan unless in
cases of default in which case it shall revert to commercial terms.
(4) Where a beneficiary leaves the public service on disciplinary grounds, the terms of the
loan shall convert to commercial terms after ninety days from the effective date of leaving
the service.
(5) Where a default occurs for whatever reason there shall be a grace period of not more
than three months, after which the car which is subject to the loan shall be repossessed and
sold to recover the balance of the loan.

-- 235 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 237
[Subsidiary]
(6) Where a repossession of a motor car occurs under paragraph (5), the Officer
Administering the Fund shall repossess the motor car within twenty one working days and the
motor car shall be disposed-off within ninety days from the date of repossession to recover
the loan balance.
(7) Where a motor car has been disposed-off under paragraph (6) and the amount
recovered is not sufficient to cover the entire loan balance, the Officer Administering the Fund
shall require the loan beneficiary to pay the difference.
(8) Any disposal of a motor car under paragraph (5) by the Officer Administering the Fund
shall be through a public auction or private treaty.
Loan interest.
17. A loan granted to a member under these Regulations shall carry an interest rate of
three per cent per annum on a reducing balance basis which shall be retained in the Fund or
such other rate as may from time to time be determined by the Cabinet Secretary in a gazette
notice.
Management cost.
18. (1) The Fund or where applicable, the financial institution referred to under these
Regulations may charge an interest of not more than two percent per annum of the value of
loan to cover its management costs.
(2) The interest charged under regulation 17 and 18(1) shall be paid by the borrower.
Responsibilities of the financial institution.
19. (1) The responsibilities of a financial institution procured under these Regulations
shall be to—
(a) maintain and operate an individual account for each beneficiary;
(b) charge securities on motor cars acquired through loans from the Fund so as to
protect the interest of the Fund, and act as a custodian of such charges;
(c) disburse monies for newly approved loans to various suppliers or sellers of motor
cars to beneficiaries, after the necessary communication in writing authorizing
disbursement to them by the officer administering the Fund;
(d) pay all outgoing and issue demand notices to defaulting borrowers through the
officer administering the Fund;
(e) issue an annual account statement to the Officer Administering the Fund for each
borrower;
(f) upon repayment of the motor car loan, interest and other expenses which may
be outstanding discharge the charge and release the security documents to the
beneficiaries; and
(g) provide quarterly reports on details of recovery of the loans to the Officer
Administering the Fund.
(2) The expenses of the Fund Secretariat shall be met from funds provided by Parliament
for that purpose which shall include but not limited to appropriations, earnings, accruals and
shall not exceed five per cent of the annual approved budget of the Fund.
Chief Executive Officer.
20. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Fund who shall be recruited and
appointed through a competitive process subject to the provisions of Article 234 (5) of the
Constitution.

-- 236 of 625 --

238 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) A person is qualified for appointment as the Chief Executive Officer if the person—
(a) is a citizen of Kenya;
(b) holds a degree in economics, finance, accounting or social sciences from a
university recognized in Kenya;
(c) satisfies the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution; and
(d) has at least ten years' experience in the relevant field.
(3) A person appointed as the Chief Executive Officer under this regulation, shall serve
for one term of five years, which may be renewed for one further term of five years.
(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall be subject to the directions of the Advisory Board
and shall be responsible for the day to day administration of the affairs of the Fund and the
Secretariat of the Fund as delegated by the Advisory Board.
Secretariat of the Fund.
21. (1) There shall be a Secretariat of the Fund to be headed by the Chief Executive Officer.
(2) The composition of the Secretariat shall be determined by the Cabinet Secretary
subject to Article 234 (2) of the Constitution.
(3) The terms and conditions of service for the Chief Executive Officer and the Fund
Secretariat shall be determined by the Cabinet Secretary in consultation with the Public
Service Commission and the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
Retention of receipts.
22. All receipts, earnings and accruals to the Fund, and the balance of the Fund at the
close of each financial year, shall be retained by the Fund for strict use for the purpose for
which the Fund is established.
Application of Government Regulations and procedures.
23. Subject to the provisions of the Act, any other legislation, the existing Government
Regulations and Procedures shall apply in the Government administration of the Fund.
Administration of the Fund.
24. (1) The Chief Executive Officer shall be designated as the administrator of the Fund.
(2) The administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) open and operate a bank account into which all monies raised under the Fund shall
be paid into;
(b) operate and maintain the bank account in the manner as prescribed by the National
Treasury from time to time;
(c) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(d) consult with the Advisory Board on matters relating to the administration of the
Fund;
(e) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records in relation
to the Fund, of all activities and undertakings financed from the Fund;
(f) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General, in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to
the Fund and submit a copy to the National Treasury and the statements shall be
prepared in such a manner as the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board shall
prescribe;

-- 237 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 239
[Subsidiary]
(g) furnish any additional information which is proper and sufficient for the purpose
of examination and audit by the Auditor-General in accordance with the provisions
of the Public Audit Act;
(h) prepare a quarterly report on the receipts into and issues out of the Fund and
submit it to the Cabinet Secretary for gazettement by the 10th day of every fourth
month.
(i) prepare estimates of revenue and expenditure and submit to the Advisory Board
for consideration and recommendation for approval by the Cabinet Secretary;
(j) prepare a work plan in respect of a financial year and in preparing this work plan
they shall ensure that the work plan—
(i) contains information on the financial and non-financial performance of the
Fund; and
(ii) is in a form that complies with the standards prescribed and published by
the Accounting Standards Board from time to time; and
(k) prepare quarterly financial statements to the Advisory Board for onward
transmission to the National Treasury.
(3) Every statement of account shall include details of the balance between the assets and
liabilities of the Fund, and shall indicate the financial status of the Fund as at the end of the
financial year concerned.
PART VI – FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
Fund Bank Account.
25. (1) A bank account of the Fund shall be opened and maintained at the Central Bank
of Kenya or a bank approved by the National Treasury.
(2) The signatories to the bank account of the Fund under paragraph (1) shall be the Chief
Executive Officer and two other persons authorized by the Advisory Board from amongst the
staff of the Fund.
(3) The signing instructions shall be such that the signature of the Chief Executive Officer
shall be mandatory on all payment cheques and instruments intended for actual release of
money from the Fund, plus any one of the other two Fund account signatories.
Withdrawal of funds from the Fund.
26. (1) All withdrawals from the Fund shall be recommended by the Chief Executive
Officer and authorized by the Advisory Board as reflected in the Fund's approved annual
estimates of expenditure for that financial year.
(2) All payments made from the Fund shall be on the basis of the approved annual
estimates of expenditure.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Offences and penalties.
27. A person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists or causes
any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided in
these Regulations, commits an offence and shall, upon conviction, be liable to imprisonment
for a term of not less than five years or to a fine not exceeding ten million shillings or to both.

-- 238 of 625 --

240 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Winding-up of the Fund.
28. In the event of winding up of the Fund, the cash balances shall be transferred to the
National Exchequer Account while other assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the Ministry
for the time being responsible for matters relating to finance.
Supplementary requirements.
29. These Regulations shall be supplemented by such requirements as may be detailed in
the loan application form issued by the Officer Administering the Fund and by the contract
between the Fund and the beneficiary.
Amendments to these Regulations.
30. The Advisory Board may from time to time recommend to the Cabinet Secretary any
amendments to these Regulations.
Persons to whom these Regulations shall apply.
31. These Regulations shall apply to—
(a) State Officers in the national government except state officers under the service of
Judicial Service Commission and Parliamentary Service Commission; and
(b) Civil Servants under the service of Public Service Commission.
SCHEDULE
Loan Threshold For State Officers and Other Public Officers
Beneficiaries Maximum Car Loan (KSh.)
State Officers
Cabinet Secretary, Attorney-General Secretary to the Cabinet,
Auditor-General
10 Million
Principal Secretaries, Chairs and Members of Independent
Commissions, Controller of Budget
8 Million
Director of Public Prosecution 6 Million
Register of Political parties, Secretaries of Independent
Constitutional Commissions, Accounting Officers/Chief
Executive Officers of Government Agencies
5 Million
Other Public Officers
Chief Executive Officers of Government Agencies or Organs 5 Million
Civil Service Grades S, T, U and Equivalent grades in public
service
4 Million
Civil Service Grades P, Q, R and Equivalent grades in the
public service
3 Million
Civil Service Grades K, L, M, N and Equivalent grades in the
public service
1.5 Million
Civil Service Grades G, H, J and Equivalent grades in the
public service
800,000
Civil Service Grades A, B, C, D, E, F and Equivalent grades in
the public service
600,000

-- 239 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 241
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (STATE OFFICERS AND
PUBLIC OFFICERS MOTOR CAR LOAN SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Object and Purpose of the Fund.
5. Capital of the Fund.
6. Sources of the Fund.
7. Expenditure of the Fund.
8. Guidelines on the Fund.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
9. Establishment and composition of the Advisory Board.
10. Functions of the Advisory Board.
11. Car loan threshold.
12. Loan application procedure.
13. Eligibility criteria.
14. Insurance in respect of motor car loan.
15. Conditions for disbursement of Funds.
16. Loan repayment.
17. Loan interest.
18. Management cost.
19. Responsibilities of the financial institution.
20. Chief Executive Officer.
21. Secretariat of the Fund.
22. Retention of receipts.
23. Application of Government Regulations and procedures.
24. Administration of the Fund.
PART IV – FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
25. Fund Bank Account.
26. Withdrawal of funds from the Fund.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
27. Offences and penalties.
28. Winding-up of the Fund.
29. Supplementary requirements.
30. Amendments to these Regulations.
31. Persons to whom these Regulations shall apply.
SCHEDULE — LOAN THRESHOLD FOR STATE OFFICERS AND OTHER PUBLIC
OFFICERS

-- 240 of 625 --

242 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (STATE OFFICERS AND
PUBLIC OFFICERS MOTOR CAR LOAN SCHEME FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 195/2015, L.N. 60/2020]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (State Officers and
Public Officers Car Loan Scheme Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Accounting Officer" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Accounting Standards Board” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public
Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Advisory Board” means the Loans Management Advisory Board established under
regulation 9;
"beneficiary" means State Officers and Public Officers working in the National Government
as prescribed in Regulation 31;
“borrower” means a person in receipt of a loan out of the Fund;
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters
relating to finance;
"Chief Executive Officer” means the Chief Executive Officer of the Fund appointed under
regulation 20;
"commercial use" means any motorised road vehicle, that by its type of construction and
equipment is designed for, and capable of transporting, goods and services for payment;
"financial institution" means any institution referred to in regulation 19 identified for the
purposes of providing financial services to the Fund;
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
“Fund” means the State Officers and Public officers Car Loan Scheme Fund established
under regulation 3;
“Motor car” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Traffic Act (Cap. 403);
“Officer administering the Fund” means a person designated as such under section 24(5)
of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
“Public Officer” means an officer employed in the National Government or the Public
Service;
“revenue” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
“State Officers” has the meaning assigned to it under Article 260 of the Constitution but
shall not include a state officer who is covered by any public motor car loan scheme; and
“value of the loan” the initial loan granted to a beneficiary or any outstanding loan balance
at any given time before full loan repayment.

-- 241 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 243
[Subsidiary]
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the State Officers and Public Officers Car
Loan Scheme Fund.
Object and Purpose of the Fund.
4. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to—
(a) provide a car loan facility to state officers and public officers of the national
government to purchase a motor car as prescribed in these Regulations; and
(b) cater for administrative expenses of the Fund;
Capital of the Fund.
5. The initial capital of the Fund shall be Kenya shillings one billion appropriated by
Parliament in the financial year 2014/15 and additional capital of the Fund shall be made in
the subsequent financial years' budgets.
Sources of the Fund.
6. There shall be paid into the Fund—
(a) monies appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Fund;
(b) income from investments made by the Fund;
(c) grants, donations, bequests or other gifts made to the Fund; and
(d) monies from any other source approved by the Cabinet Secretary.
Expenditure of the Fund.
7. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in pursuance of the object and purpose for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
budget estimates prepared by the officer administering the Fund and shall be recommended
by the Advisory Board for approval by the Cabinet Secretary at the beginning of the financial
year to which they relate.
(3) Any revision of the approved budget estimates, and of any cost estimate, shall be
referred to the Advisory Board and the Cabinet Secretary for approval.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), the Cabinet Secretary may, with
the approval of Parliament, make payments out of the Fund for purposes other than for the
objects and purpose of the Fund, on temporary basis, where such deviation is necessitated
by a major natural disaster or other significant unforeseen event, and thereafter furnish a
published report to Parliament.
[L.N. 60/2020, r. 2.]
Guidelines on the Fund.
8. The Officer administering the Fund, in consultation with the Advisory Board shall
develop guidelines for the proper management of Fund for approval by the Cabinet Secretary.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment and composition of the Advisory Board.
9. (1) There is established an Advisory Board of the Fund.

-- 242 of 625 --

244 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The Advisory Board shall comprise—
(a) the Principal Secretary for the National Treasury or his or her nominee who shall
not be below Job Group "T", who shall be the Chairperson;
(b) the Principal Secretary of the State Department responsible for Public Service
Management or his or her nominee who shall not be below Job Group R;
(c) the Principal Secretary of the State Department responsible for Transport or his or
her nominee drawn from the relevant technical department dealing with matters
of motor car and shall not be below Job Group R;
(d) the Chief Executive Officer or Secretary, Salaries and Remuneration Commission
or his or her nominee who shall not be below the level of a director;
(e) the Chief Executive Officer or Secretary, Public Service Commission or his or her
nominee who shall not be below Job Group "R"; and
(f) two persons nominated by the Principal Secretary for the National Treasury who
shall not be below Job Group R, from the Directorates of—
(i) Budget, Financial and Economic Affairs; and
(ii) Administrative Services.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer of the Fund shall be the Secretary to the Advisory Board.
(4) The terms and conditions of service of members of the Advisory Board and the
Secretariat shall be as determined by the Cabinet Secretary in consultation with the Public
Service Commission and the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
Functions of the Advisory Board.
10. The functions of the Advisory Board shall be to—
(a) process and approve loans in accordance with the existing terms and conditions of
borrowing;
(b) liaise with the financial institution to set up a Fund for the disbursement of the
loans;
(c) oversee the management of the Fund;
(d) monitor and evaluate the performance of the Fund;
(e) approve annual work programmes and procurement plans for the Fund;
(f) recommend the investment of any surplus funds not immediately required in
securities approved by the National Treasury, for the purposes of realizing the
objects and purpose for which the Fund is established;
(g) cause to be kept all proper books and records of account of the income, expenditure,
assets and liabilities of the Fund;
(h) receive any gifts, donations, grants or endowments made to the Fund;
(i) consider and recommend approval of the financial statements to the officer
administering the Fund;
(j) recommend as when required the procurement of a financial institution to
administer the Fund on its behalf;
(k) perform any other functions that are ancillary to the objects and purpose for which
the Fund is established; and
(l) determine its own procedures for conducting its business.

-- 243 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 245
[Subsidiary]
Car loan threshold.
11. The maximum loan each beneficiary shall be eligible to, is set out in the Schedule in
these Regulations or as may be determined the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, from
time to time.
Loan application procedure.
12. (1) An application for a loan under these Regulations shall be accompanied by the
following documents where appropriate—
(a) duly filled application Form by the applicant;
(b) a certified copy of the National Identify Card or Passport;
(c) certified copies of pay-slips for the immediate last three months by the respective
accounting officers;
(d) a certified copy of the sale agreement relating to the motor car;
(e) a certified copy of the log book;
(f) a non-refundable application fees of one thousand shillings or as determined from
time to time by the officer administering the Fund; and
(g) a valuation report on the motor car.
(2) For the purposes of these Regulations, the value of a new Loan application vehicle shall
be as quoted on the invoice from the supplier whereas the procedure. value of a used vehicle
shall be as determined by a report from the Automobile Association of Kenya, a Government
Department dealing with similar matters or a certified automobile valuer registered in Kenya.
(3) For the purposes of these Regulations, a loan shall not be given to a beneficiary to
purchase a used vehicle that is more than eight years old from the date of manufacture or as
may be determined from time to time.
(4) The applicant shall bear the cost of valuation, registration and other legal fees.
Eligibility criteria.
13. The officer administering the Fund shall use the following eligibility criteria when
evaluating a loan application—
(a) first in first out principle of loan processing;
(b) applicable loan threshold for each grade of the beneficiary;
(c) compliance with the provisions of regulation 12;
(d) ability to repay the loan within existing statutes and the stipulated time;
(e) an undertaking by the beneficiary that the motor car shall jointly be registered
and owned for the period of the loan by the National Treasury on behalf of the
Government of Kenya and the beneficiary until the loan is repaid in full by the
beneficiary;
(f) an undertaking to meet such costs for the purpose of securing a motor car
comprehensive insurance cover and pay such sum of money on or before thirty
days before the expiry of the comprehensive motor car insurance policy as may be
determined by the officer administering the Fund from time to time;
(g) no borrower shall be eligible for more than one loan at a time from the Fund within
five years; and
(h) any other conditions as may be prescribed by the officer administering the Fund.

-- 244 of 625 --

246 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Insurance in respect of motor car loan.
14. A borrower shall take and maintain a comprehensive motor car insurance policy with
an insurance company approved by the Advisory Board, the cost of which shall be paid out of
the Fund and debited to the borrower's account.
Conditions for disbursement of Funds.
15. (1) A loan approved by the Advisory Board under these Regulations shall be released
from the Fund to the bank account of the supplier or seller of the motor car.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), a person disbursing the funds shall
confirm that the beneficiary has complied with regulations 12 and 13 of these Regulations.
(3) The officer administering the Fund shall issue a caveat prohibiting the transfer of the
motor car and shall notify the Registrar of Motor Vehicles accordingly.
(4) The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall confirm in writing to the officer administering the
Fund, that a caveat issued under paragraph (3) has been entered and noted in the appropriate
motor car file or data base in the registry of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
(5) During the loan repayment period the beneficiary shall—
(a) not lease, sell or agree to sell or part with possession of the charged motor car or any
part of the motor car without the prior written consent of the officer administering
the Fund;
(b) meet costs for the motor car comprehensive insurance cover and pay such sum of
money as may be determined by the officer administering the Fund from time to
time;
(c) ensure that the motor car is not used for commercial purposes; and
(d) maintain the motor car in a satisfactory state of repair.
(6) All legal documentation and disbursement of funds shall be supervised by the Advisory
Board.
(7) The officer administering the Fund shall be the custodian of the motor car log book
until the loan is repaid in full by the beneficiary and thereafter the Officer Administering the
Fund shall transfer the motor car log book to the beneficiary in his or her name within ninety
days after full repayment of the loan.
(8) Upon receiving the motor car log book in his or her name, the beneficiary shall sign a
discharge form confirming receipt of the motor car log book from the Officer Administering
the Fund.
Loan repayment.
16. (1) A loan advanced under these Regulations shall be repaid in full within sixty
months.
(2) The preferred method of loan repayment shall be through a check-off system or a bank
standing order by the beneficiary.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), where a state officer or public officer
leaves public service employment for whatever reason other than disciplinary grounds, the
terms of the loan shall remain in force and shall not change for the life of the loan unless in
cases of default in which case it shall revert to commercial terms.
(4) Where a beneficiary leaves the public service on disciplinary grounds, the terms of the
loan shall convert to commercial terms after ninety days from the effective date of leaving
the service.

-- 245 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 247
[Subsidiary]
(5) Where a default occurs for whatever reason there shall be a grace period of not more
than three months, after which the car which is subject to the loan shall be repossessed and
sold to recover the balance of the loan.
(6) Where a repossession of a motor car occurs under paragraph (5), the Officer
Administering the Fund shall repossess the motor car within twenty one working days and the
motor car shall be disposed-off within ninety days from the date of repossession to recover
the loan balance.
(7) Where a motor car has been disposed-off under paragraph (6) and the amount
recovered is not sufficient to cover the entire loan balance, the Officer Administering the Fund
shall require the loan beneficiary to pay the difference.
(8) Any disposal of a motor car under paragraph (5) by the Officer Administering the Fund
shall be through a public auction or private treaty.
Loan interest.
17. A loan granted to a member under these Regulations shall carry an interest rate of
three per cent per annum on a reducing balance basis which shall be retained in the Fund or
such other rate as may from time to time be determined by the Cabinet Secretary in a gazette
notice.
Management cost.
18. (1) The Fund or where applicable, the financial institution referred to under these
Regulations may charge an interest of not more than two percent per annum of the value of
loan to cover its management costs.
(2) The interest charged under regulation 17 and 18(l) shall be paid by the borrower.
Responsibilities of the financial institution.
19. (1) The responsibilities of a financial institution procured under these Regulations
shall be to—
(a) maintain and operate an individual account for each beneficiary;
(b) charge securities on motor cars acquired through loans from the Fund so as to
protect the interest of the Fund, and act as a custodian of such charges;
(c) disburse monies for newly approved loans to various suppliers or sellers of motor
cars to beneficiaries, after the necessary communication in writing authorizing
disbursement to them by the officer administering the Fund;
(d) pay all outgoing and issue demand notices to defaulting borrowers through the
officer administering the Fund;
(e) issue an annual account statement to the Officer Administering the Fund for each
borrower;
(f) upon repayment of the motor car loan, interest and other expenses which may
be outstanding discharge the charge and release the security documents to the
beneficiaries; and
(g) provide quarterly reports on details of recovery of the loans to the Officer
Administering the Fund.
(2) The expenses of the Fund Secretariat shall be met from funds provided by Parliament
for that purpose which shall include but not limited to appropriations, earnings, accruals and
shall not exceed five per cent of the annual approved budget of the Fund

-- 246 of 625 --

248 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Chief Executive Officer.
20. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Fund who shall be recruited and
appointed through a competitive process subject to the provisions of Article 234 (5) of the
Constitution.
(2) A person is qualified for appointment as the Chief Executive Officer if the person—
(a) is a citizen of Kenya;
(b) holds a degree in economics, finance, accounting or social sciences from a
university recognized in Kenya;
(c) satisfies the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution; and
(d) has at least ten years' experience in the relevant field.
(3) A person appointed as the Chief Executive Officer under this regulation, shall serve
for one term of five years, which may be renewed for one further term of five years.
(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall be subject to the directions of the Advisory Board
and shall be responsible for the day to day administration of the affairs of the Fund and the
Secretariat of the Fund as delegated by the Advisory Board.
Secretariat of the Fund.
21. (1) There shall be a Secretariat of the Fund to be headed by the Chief Executive Officer.
(2) The composition of the Secretariat shall be determined by the Cabinet Secretary
subject to Article 234 (2) of the Constitution.
(3) The terms and conditions of service for the Chief Executive Officer and the Fund
Secretariat shall be determined by the Cabinet Secretary in consultation with the Public
Service Commission and the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
Retention of receipts.
22. All receipts, earnings and accruals to the Fund, and the balance of the Fund at the
close of each financial year, shall be retained by the Fund for strict use for the purpose for
which the Fund is established.
Application of Government Regulations and procedures.
23. Subject to the provisions of the Act, any other legislation, the existing Government
Regulations and Procedures shall apply in the Government administration of the Fund.
Administration of the Fund.
24. (1) The Chief Executive Officer shall be designated as the administrator of the Fund.
(2) The administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) open and operate a bank account into which all monies raised under the Fund shall
be paid into;
(b) operate and maintain the bank account in the manner as prescribed by the National
Treasury from time to time;
(c) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(d) consult with the Advisory Board on matters relating to the administration of the
Fund;
(e) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records in relation
to the Fund, of all activities and undertakings financed from the Fund;

-- 247 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 249
[Subsidiary]
(f) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General, in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to
the Fund and submit a copy to the National Treasury and the statements shall be
prepared in such a manner as the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board shall
prescribe;
(g) furnish any additional information which is proper and sufficient for the purpose
of examination and audit by the Auditor-General in accordance with the provisions
of the Public Audit Act;
(h) prepare a quarterly report on the receipts into and issues out of the Fund and
submit it to the Cabinet Secretary for gazettement by the 10th day of every fourth
month.
(i) prepare estimates of revenue and expenditure and submit to the Advisory Board
for consideration and recommendation for approval by the Cabinet Secretary;
(j) prepare a work plan in respect of a financial year and in preparing this work plan
they shall ensure that the work plan—
(i) contains information on the financial and non-financial performance of the
Fund; and
(ii) is in a form that complies with the standards prescribed and published by
the Accounting Standards Board from time to time; and
(k) prepare quarterly financial statements to the Advisory Board for onward
transmission to the National Treasury.
(3) Every statement of account shall include details of the balance between the assets and
liabilities of the Fund, and shall indicate the financial status of the Fund as at the end of the
financial year concerned.
PART IV – FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
Fund Bank Account.
25. (1) A bank account of the Fund shall be opened and maintained at the Central Bank
of Kenya or a bank approved by the National Treasury.
(2) The signatories to the bank account of the Fund under paragraph (1) shall be the Chief
Executive Officer and two other persons authorized by the Advisory Board from amongst the
staff of the Fund.
(3) The signing instructions shall be such that the signature of the Chief Executive Officer
shall be mandatory on all payment cheques and instruments intended for actual release of
money from the Fund, plus any one of the other two Fund account signatories.
Withdrawal of funds from the Fund.
26. (1) All withdrawals from the Fund shall be recommended by the Chief Executive
Officer and authorized by the Advisory Board as reflected in the Fund's approved annual
estimates of expenditure for that financial year.
(2) All payments made from the Fund shall be on the basis of the approved annual
estimates of expenditure.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Offences and penalties.
27. A person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists or causes
any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided in

-- 248 of 625 --

250 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
these Regulations, commits an offence and shall, upon conviction, be liable to imprisonment
for a term of not less than five years or to a fine not exceeding ten million shillings or to both.
Winding-up of the Fund.
28. In the event of winding up of the Fund, the cash balances shall be transferred to the
National Exchequer Account while other assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the Ministry
for the time being responsible for matters relating to finance.
Supplementary requirements.
29. These Regulations shall be supplemented by such requirements as may be detailed in
the loan application form issued by the Officer Administering the Fund and by the contract
between the Fund and the beneficiary.
Amendments to these Regulations.
30. The Advisory Board may from time to time recommend to the Cabinet Secretary any
amendments to these Regulations.
Persons to whom these Regulations shall apply.
31. These Regulations shall apply to—
(a) State Officers in the national government except state officers under the service of
Judicial Service Commission and Parliamentary Service Commission; and
(b) Civil Servants under the service of Public Service Commission.
SCHEDULE
LOAN THRESHOLD FOR STATE OFFICERS AND OTHER PUBLIC OFFICERS
Beneficiaries Maximum Car Loan (KSh.)
State Officers
Cabinet Secretary,
Attorney-General Secretary to the Cabinet,
Auditor-General
10 Million
Principal Secretaries,
Chairs and Members of Independent Commissions,
Controller of Budget
8 Million
Director of Public Prosecution 6 Million
Register of Political parties,
Secretaries of Independent Constitutional Commissions,
Accounting Officers/Chief Executive Officers of Government
Agencies
5 Million
Other Public Officers
Chief Executive Officers of Government Agencies or Organs 5 Million
Civil Service Grades S, T, U and Equivalent grades in public service 4 Million
Civil Service Grades P, Q, R and Equivalent grades in the public
service
3 Million
Civil Service Grades K, L, M, N and Equivalent grades in the public
service
1.5 Million
Civil Service Grades G, H, J and Equivalent grades in the public
service
800,000

-- 249 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 251
[Subsidiary]
Beneficiaries Maximum Car Loan (KSh.)
Civil Service Grades A, B, C, D, E, F and Equivalent grades in the
public service
600,000

-- 250 of 625 --

252 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AFRICAN UNION AND OTHER
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS SUBSCRIPTION FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Object and purpose of the Fund.
5. Payments out of the Fund.
7. Administration of the Fund.
8. Winding-up of the Fund.

-- 251 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 253
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AFRICAN UNION AND OTHER
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS SUBSCRIPTION FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 10/2017]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (African Union and
other International Organisations Subscription Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters
relating to finance;
"financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
"Fund" means the African Union and other International Organisations Subscription Fund
established under regulation 3;
"National Exchequer Account" has the meaning assigned to it in section 17 of the Act; and
“officer administering the Fund" means the person designated as such under regulation
7(1).
Establishment of the Fund.
3. (1) There is established a fund to be known as the African Union and other International
Organisations Subscription Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of—
(a) ten percent of the import declaration fee imposed under section 7 of the
Miscellaneous Fees and Levies Act (Cap. 469C);
(b) monies appropriated by the parliament; and
(c) any other monies that may accrue to the Fund.
(3) The account of the Fund shall be opened and maintained at the Central Bank of Kenya.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
4. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to make Kenya's contribution to the African
Union and any other international organisation, to which Kenya has a financial obligation.
Payments out of the Fund.
5. There shall be paid out of the Fund, payments pursuant to the object and purpose for
which the Fund is established.
Administration of the Fund.
7. (1) The Principal Secretary of the National Treasury is hereby designated as the officer
administering the Fund.
(2) The officer administering the Fund shall—
(a) control the administration of the Fund;
(b) cause to be kept all proper books of accounts and other books and records relating
to the Fund; and
(c) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of account relating to

-- 252 of 625 --

254 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
the Fund in such form as the National Treasury may from time to time prescribe,
in accordance with Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A).
Winding-up of the Fund.
8. In the event of winding up of the Fund, the cash balances shall be transferred to the
National Exchequer Account while other assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the National
Treasury.

-- 253 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 255
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (SPORTS, ARTS
AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Sources of the Fund.
5. Expenditure on the Fund.
6. Capital of the Fund.
7. Objects and purpose of the Fund.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
8. Establishment of the Sports, Arts and Social Development Fund Oversight
Board.
9. Qualifications of members of the Advisory Board.
10. Functions of the Board.
11. Administration of Fund.
12. Secretariat.
13. Funding eligibility criteria.
14. Application for funding.
15. Fund disbursements.
16. Investment of funds.
17. Retention of receipts.
18. Application of Government regulations and procedures.
19. Preparation and submission of work plans, etc.
20. Approval of reports.
21. Annual reports.
22. Offences and Penalties.
23. Winding-up of the Fund.
24. Revocation of LN 174 of 2018.

-- 254 of 625 --

256 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (SPORTS, ARTS
AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 194/2018, L.N. 236/2018]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Sports, Arts and
Social Development Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Administrator of the Fund" means a person designated as such under regulation 11;
"Board" means the Sports, Arts and Social Development Fund Oversight Board constituted
in accordance with regulation 8;
"Fund" means the Sports, Arts and Social Development Fund established under regulation
3; and
"Government implementing agency" means a government agency established by
legislation and whose mandate extends to the promotion of the objects and purposes of this
Fund.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the Sports, Arts and Social Development
Fund.
Sources of the Fund.
4. (1) The Fund shall consist of—
(a) all the proceeds required to be paid into the Fund under section 69A of the Betting,
Lotteries and Gaming Act (Cap. 131);
(b) all the proceeds required to be paid into the Fund under section 35 (5A) of the
Income Tax Act (Cap. 470);
(c) all the proceeds required to be paid into the Fund under section 36 (5) of the Excise
Duty Act (Cap. 472);
(d) such moneys as may be appropriated by the National Assembly;
(e) grants and donations;
(f) income generated from the proceeds of the Fund; and
(g) any moneys accruing to or received by the Fund from any other source.
(2) The proceeds of the Fund shall be apportioned as follows—
(a) an amount not exceeding sixty percent to social development including universal
health care;
(b) an amount not exceeding thirty five percent to the promotion and development of
sports;
(c) an amount not exceeding twenty percent to the promotion and development of
arts; and
(d) an amount not exceeding five percent to government strategic interventions whose
expenditure shall be subject to approval by Cabinet.

-- 255 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 257
[Subsidiary]
(3) The Cabinet Secretary may, on the advice of the Board, vary the apportionments
specified in paragraph (2) of this regulation.
Expenditure on the Fund.
5. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in pursuance of the objects and purposes for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
work programmes and cost estimates which shall be prepared by the Administrator of the
Fund, and approved by the Board at the beginning of the financial year to which they relate.
(3) Any revision of the approved annual work programmes, and of any cost estimate, shall
be referred to the Board for approval.
Capital of the Fund.
6. The initial capital of the Fund shall be twenty million Shillings appropriated by
Parliament in the financial year 2018/2019.
Objects and purpose of the Fund.
7. (1) The object and purpose of the Fund is to provide funding to support the development
and promotion of sports and arts and the promotion of social development including universal
health care.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1), the Fund shall provide for—
(a) promote social development including universal health care;
(b) financing the development of sports and recreation facilities including stadia,
gymnasiums, buildings, tracks;
(c) enhancing support and access to funding for sportspersons and sports
organizations to enable their participation in sporting events and competitions;
(d) facilitation for the acquisition and provision of equipment to sports and recreation
facilities;
(e) support for the identification, nurturing and development of talent in sports and
arts;
(f) facilitation of training and capacity building programmes for persons involved in
sports and recreation, creative arts, artistic production, contemporary and cultural
practitioners;
(g) facilitation for the identification, development and capacity building of technical
personnel and sports support personnel involved in sports and recreation;
(h) support for the promotion and development of artistic production of contemporary
or cultural goods and services;
(i) facilitation for the marketing and promotion of artistic productions and
contemporary or cultural goods and services;
(j) support linkages with domestic, regional and international markets for sports,
artistic productions and contemporary or cultural goods and services;
(k) facilitation for exhibition and promotion of contemporary or cultural artistic
production of goods and services for national identity and pride;
(l) financing the acquisition, development and preservation of, among others,
heritage sites, cultural centres, national monuments, tangible and intangible
heritage and culture and heritage equipment and tools; and

-- 256 of 625 --

258 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(m) facilitate innovation, research and documentation in arts, culture and the creative
industry, sports and social development.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Sports, Arts and Social Development Fund Oversight Board.
8. (1) There is established a Board to be known as the Sports, Arts and Social Development
Fund Oversight Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to
finance;
(b) the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to sports;
(c) the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to arts;
(d) the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to
health;
(e) the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to
education;
(f) one person not being a public officer nominated by the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for sports with competence in matters relating to sports;
(g) one person not being a public officer nominated by the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for health with competence in matters relating to health; and
(h) one person not being a public officer nominated by the Cabinet Secretary with
competence in matters relating to finance.
(3) The persons nominated under paragraph (2) (f), (g) and (h) shall be appointed by the
Cabinet Secretary.
(4) The President shall appoint one of the members appointed under this regulation to
be the Chairperson of the Board.
(5) In the absence of the Chairperson in any meeting of the Board, the members present
shall elect one of the members under paragraph (2)(a) to (e) present to chair the meeting.
(6) The members under paragraph (2)(a) to (e) may attend in person or through a
designated representative.
(7) The Board may, from time to time, co-opt other members as it may deem necessary,
for the proper and efficient discharge of its oversight functions over the Fund.
(8) The quorum for the conduct of meetings of the Board shall be four members.
(9) The Board shall regulate its own procedure.
Qualifications of members of the Advisory Board.
9. A person shall be eligible for appointment as a member of the Board under regulation
8(2)(f) and (h) if that person—
(a) holds a university degree from a recognized university in Kenya;

-- 257 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 259
[Subsidiary]
(b) has knowledge and experience of not less than ten years in any of the following
fields—
(i) sports management;
(ii) administration;
(iii) finance;
(iv) law;
(v) accounting;
(vi) Health; or
(vii) economics; and
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
[L.N. 236/2018, r. 2.]
Functions of the Board.
10.
The Board shall—
(a) provide overall oversight of the Fund;
(b) approve the ceilings for funding under sports, arts and social development in each
financial year;
(c) develop policy guidelines relating to disbursements by the Fund;
(d) prescribe other guidelines for the administration of the Fund;
(e) review the estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund and recommend
them to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for Sports for approval and submission to the
Cabinet Secretary responsible for finance;
(f) review guidelines on the fund priorities and criteria for allocation and disbursement
of funds to implementing agencies in furtherance of the objects of the Fund;
(g) monitor and evaluate the programmes and activities under the Fund;
(h) facilitate and develop sectoral linkages to the Fund;
(i) review the performance of the Fund and make recommendations on the operations of
the Fund to the administrator of the Fund;
(j) review and approve the financial statements of the Fund before submission to the
Auditor General;
(k) review policy on the management of assets, equipment and all properties under the
Fund;
(l) receive reports on the performance of the Fund; and
(m) any other activity that in the opinion of the Board, will promote and facilitate the
realization of the objects and purposes of the Fund.
(2) The Oversight Board shall prepare and submit a quarterly report to the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for finance on the performance of the Fund with copies to the Cabinet
Secretaries responsible for sports, arts, health and education.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for finance shall prepare and submit a quarterly
report to the Cabinet on the performance of the Fund.

-- 258 of 625 --

260 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Administration of Fund.
11. (1) The administrator of the Fund shall be the accounting officer responsible for
matters relating to sports or any other person designated by the Cabinet Secretary, in writing,
for that purpose.
(2) The Administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) open and operate a separate bank account or accounts at the Central Bank of Kenya
or a bank to be approved by the Board and the National Treasury in accordance
with the Act;
(b) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(c) consult with the Board on matters relating to the administration of the Fund;
(d) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records relating to
all activities and undertakings financed from the Fund;
(e) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General, upon the approval by the Board,
in respect of each financial year and within three months after the end thereof,
a statement of accounts relating to the Fund and submit a copy to the National
Treasury and the statements shall be prepared in such a manner as the Accounting
Standards Board shall prescribe in accordance with the provisions of the Public
Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A) and Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B);
(f) furnish additional information to the Auditor-General as he or she may consider to
be proper and sufficient for the purpose of examination and audit by the Auditor-
General in accordance with the provisions of the Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B);
(g) prepare a quarterly report on financial and non-financial activities of the Fund in
accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A),
and as may be prescribed from time to time by the Accounting Standards Board and
submit the report to the Board for approval and subsequent transmission to the
National Treasury and the Controller of Budget; and
(h) be the custodian of all the assets, equipment and properties under the Fund.
(3) Every statement of account shall include details of the balance between the assets and
liabilities of the Fund, and shall indicate the financial status of the Fund as at the end of the
quarter concerned.
Secretariat.
12. (1) There shall be a secretariat of the Fund which shall consist of a Chief Executive
Officer and such other staff as are necessary for the proper discharge of the functions of the
Fund.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer and other staff of the secretariat shall be appointed
competitively in consultation with the Public Service Commission.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall, subject to the direction of the Administrator, be
responsible for the day-to-day running of the affairs of the Fund.
(4) Parliament shall appropriate administration expenses not exceeding three percent of
the annual budgetary allocations of the Fund.

-- 259 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 261
[Subsidiary]
Funding eligibility criteria.
13. A sports organization, professional sports person or government implementing
agency shall be eligible to apply for funding from the Fund if—
(a) in the case of a sports organization if the organization—
(i) is registered under the Sports Act (Cap. 223);
(ii) has an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the
organizations and the medium term plan approved by the governing body
of the sports organization;
(iii) has, in the case of an infrastructure development project, prepared project
designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the governing body and
the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant government institutions;
and
(iv) meets any other criteria prescribed by the Board.
(b) for a professional sportsperson, he or she—
(i) has a valid license issued under the Sports Act (Cap. 223);
(ii) has met the criteria for participation for competition in the respective sport,
nationally, regionally and internationally; and
(iii) meets any other criteria prescribed by the Board.
(c) for a government implementing agency the agency—
(i) is established by legislation;
(ii) has an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the
agency and the medium term plan approved by the governing body of the
government implementing agency;
(iii) has, in the case of an infrastructure development project, prepared project
designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the governing body and
the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant government institutions;
and
(iv) meets any other criteria prescribed by the Board.
Application for funding.
14. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall by the 30th August of each year issue a budget
circular for the Fund to the eligible persons indicating—
(a) the ceilings for funding under sports, arts and social development;
(b) priority programmes, projects and activities to be funded in that financial year; and
(c) any other information that the Board may consider necessary.
(2) A person who wishes to receive funding from the Fund and meets the criteria set out
under regulation 13 shall at least six months before the commencement of a financial year
apply to the Administrator of the Fund in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Board.

-- 260 of 625 --

262 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) An application for funding under paragraph (2) shall be accompanied by—
(a) in case of a sports organisation—
(i) the certificate of registration issued under the Sports Act (Cap. 223);
(ii) the minutes of a properly constituted meeting of the governing body of the
organization containing the resolution to apply for funding from the Fund;
(iii) an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the
organizations and the medium term plan approved by the governing body
of the sports organization;
(iv) the project designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the governing
body and the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant government
institutions, where applicable;
(v) a statutory declaration of programmes funded through other sources;
(vi) the details and signatories of the bank account in the name of the
organization where the funds shall be channeled; and
(vii) any other information as may be required by the Board.
(b) in the case of a professional sportsperson—
(i) a valid licence issued under the Sports Act (Cap. 223);
(ii) proof that he or she has met the criteria for participation for competition in
the respective sport, nationally, regionally and internationally;
(iii) a statutory declaration of his or her programmes funded through other
sources;
(iv) a written confirmation from the accounting officer responsible for matters
relating to sports that the professional sportsperson has met the criteria set
under paragraph (ii); and
(v) the details and signatories of the bank account where the funds shall be
channeled;
(c) in the case of a government implementing agency—
(i) a copy of the legislation establishing the agency;
(ii) an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the agency and
the medium term plan approved by the governing body of the government
implementing body;
(iii) the minutes of a properly constituted meeting of the governing body of the
government implementing agency containing the resolution to apply for
funding from the Fund;
(iv) the project designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the governing
body and the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant government
institutions, where applicable;
(v) a statutory declaration of programmes funded through other sources;
(vi) the details and signatories of the bank account in the name of the agency
where the funds shall be channeled; and
(vii) any other information as may be required by the Board.
Fund disbursements.
15. (1) The funds under the Fund shall be disbursed under the following conditions—
(a) all disbursements from the Fund shall be approved and recorded in minutes of the
Board;

-- 261 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 263
[Subsidiary]
(b) disbursements from the Fund shall be to support the objects and purpose of this
Fund;
(c) transfers to defray the expenses in respect of the administration of the Fund shall
be as approved by the Board for the respective financial year;
(d) the Board shall set out other conditions and requirements for release of funds, to
ensure efficient and effective management of resources.
(2) A recipient shall—
(a) submit quarterly and annual progress reports of the programmes, projects and
activities funded by the Fund; and
(b) allow staff of the secretariat to monitor and evaluate programmes, projects and
activities funded by the Fund.
(3) A recipient shall return any unutilized funds disbursed in accordance with paragraph
(1) where—
(a) the purpose for which the funds were disbursed was not undertaken; or
(b) the purpose for which the funds were disbursed was undertaken but the funds were
not fully utilized; or
(c) savings are realized as a result of change in circumstances.
(4) Unutilized funds returned under paragraph (2) shall be recorded as receipts of the
Fund.
(5) A recipient who fails to comply with paragraph (2) and (3) shall not be eligible for any
subsequent disbursement until full compliance.
Investment of funds.
16. The Administrator may, with the approval of the Board, invest any of the funds of the
Fund which are not immediately required for its purposes in accordance with the provisions
of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A).
Retention of receipts.
17. All receipts, earnings and accruals to the Fund, and the balance of the Fund at the
close of each financial year, shall be retained by the Fund for use for the purpose for which
the Fund is established.
Application of Government regulations and procedures.
18. Subject to the provisions of the Act, existing government regulations and procedures
shall apply in the administration of the Fund.
Preparation and submission of work plans, etc.
19. The Administrator of the Fund shall prepare a work plan, projects and quarterly reports
in respect of a financial year and in preparing the work plan, projects and quarterly reports
and ensure the work plan, projects and quarterly reports—
(a) contain information on the financial and non-financial performance of the Fund;
and
(b) are in a form that complies with the standards prescribed and published by the
Accounting Standards Board from time to time.

-- 262 of 625 --

264 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Approval of reports.
20. The work plans, projects, procurement plans and quarterly reports shall be prepared
by the administrator of the Fund before submission to the Board for approval.
Annual reports.
21. (1) The administrator of the Fund shall prepare annual financial and non-financial
reports in accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A)
and as may be prescribed from time to time by the Accounting Standards Board.
(2) In addition, the administrator of the Fund shall prepare an annual general performance
report of the Fund to be submitted with the report under paragraph (1).
(3) The annual financial and non-financial statements under paragraph (1) shall be
approved by the Board and submitted to the Auditor-General for audit within three months
after the end of the financial year in accordance with the Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B) and
a copy thereof submitted to the Cabinet Secretary responsible finance, Cabinet Secretary
responsible for sports and arts and Cabinet Secretary responsible for health.
Offences and Penalties.
22. A person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists or causes
any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided in
these Regulations, commits an offence and shall, upon conviction, be liable to imprisonment
for a term of not less than five years or to a fine not exceeding ten million shillings or to both.
Winding-up of the Fund.
23. (1) In the event of winding up of the Fund, the administrator of the Fund shall pay
any amount remaining in the Fund into the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the
national government while other assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the Ministry for
the time being responsible for matters relating to sports.
(2) The administrator of the Fund shall prepare the final winding up report not later than
six months from the date of the decision to wind up the Fund and submit the financial and
non-financial reports to the Auditor-General for audit with a copy to the National Treasury.
(3) The Auditor-General shall after audit, submit the final report to the National Assembly
within three months of the receipt of the initial report under paragraph (2).
Revocation of LN 174 of 2018.
24. The Public Finance Management (Sports, Arts and Social Development Fund)
Regulations (L.N. 174/2018) are revoked.

-- 263 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 265
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (TOURISM PROMOTION FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Capital of the Fund.
5. Object and purpose.
6. Sources of funds.
7. Payment out of the Fund.
8. Retention of funds.
9. Funding eligibility criteria.
10. Procedure for funding.
11. Conditions for disbursements of funds.
12. Obligations of the recipient of funds.
13. Request for payment from the Fund.
14. Withholding of payments.
15. Imposition of sanctions.
16. Applications for payments out of the fund.
17. Establishment and composition of the Board.
18. Functions of the Board.
19. Appointment of chief executive officer.
20. Officer Administering the Fund.
21. Power of Officer Administering the Fund.
22. Secretariat support for Officer Administering the Fund.
23. Accounts of the Fund.
24. Overdrawn accounts.
25. Advances to the Board.
26. Investments of the funds.
27. Financial and procurement Regulations.
28. Review of performance of the Fund.
29. Annual estimates.
30. Quarterly reports.
31. Accounts and audit.
32. Administration expenses.
33. Offences and Penalties.
34. Winding-up of the Fund.

-- 264 of 625 --

266 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (TOURISM PROMOTION FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 140/2018]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Tourism Promotion
Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Board" means the Oversight Board established under regulation 17;
"Cabinet Secretary" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"Fund" means the Tourism Promotion Fund established under regulation 3 of these
Regulations;
"Officer Administering the Fund" means the Principal Secretary for the time being
responsible for matters relating to tourism;
"operational and maintenance expenses" means moneys included in the approved annual
budget of the Fund dedicated to meeting the routine administrative expenses of the
Secretariat;
"plugging projects" means projects which support the development, promotion and
branding of tourism in Kenya;
"tourism events" means natural phenomena or human scheduled activity which attract
visitors to a particular area as organizers, participants, spectators or service providers to
support the activity or a combination of several purpose of engagement, including wildebeest
migration, observation of eclipse, exhibition, conferences, sporting events, cultural festivals
and dances;
"tourism implementing agency" means a government agency involved in the development,
promotion and branding of tourism in Kenya;
"tourism niche product" means an attraction, good or service of special appeal and of
specific interest to a particular market segment;
"tourism product" means an attraction, good or service which contributes to the total
visitor or tourist experience in a destination, including wildlife, culture, rivers, beaches,
historical sites, museums, hotels and artifacts.
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a fund to be known as the Tourism Promotion Fund which shall
operate under the budgeting, accounting, reporting and auditing framework of the Act.
Capital of the Fund.
4. The initial capital of the Fund shall be 200 million shillings appropriated by Parliament
in the financial year 2018/19.
Object and purpose.
5. (1) The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide funds to support
development, promotion and branding of tourism sector.

-- 265 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 267
[Subsidiary]
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1) of this regulation, the Fund shall
provide for—
(a) financing development, promotion and branding programmes and initiatives in
relation to tourism products, including tourism niche products and tourism events;
(b) financing development, promotion and branding of Kenya in specific local, regional
and international market segments;
(c) financing tourism data capture, analysis and dissemination of the same and
any other related research which may include deployment of technology based
applications;
(d) financing development of tourism facilities and establishments in areas where
the private sector is unable or unwilling to develop, but with a high potential for
tourism promotion and branding;
(e) co-financing of tourism promotion projects with the county governments on the
basis of an agreed ratio of matching grants;
(f) funding programmes and initiatives for tourism safety and security geared towards
development, promotion and branding of tourism sector;
(g) financing development of innovations and inventions which promote tourism
development, promotion and branding;
(h) funding of plugging projects which contribute to development, promotion and
branding of tourism sector;
(i) financing programmes and initiatives geared towards tourism intelligence and
information gathering for purposes of developing, promoting and branding
tourism in Kenya; and
(j) standard development and capacity building in the tourism sector.
Sources of funds.
6. The Fund shall consist of—
(a) proceeds realised under section 3 of the Air Passengers Service Charge Act (Cap.
475);
(b) moneys appropriated by the National Assembly for the purpose of the Fund;
(c) income from investments of any surplus funds in the Fund;
(d) interest accruing to the Fund;
(e) grants, donations or other bequests made to the Fund;
(f) moneys paid into the Fund from any other source as may from time to time be
approved by the Cabinet Secretary; and
(g) any other moneys as may be provided for in an Act of Parliament.
Payment out of the Fund.
7. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund monies in respect of any expenses incurred in
pursuant of the objects and purposes for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred out of the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
work programmes and cost estimates which shall be prepared by the Officer Administering the
Fund, and approved by the Board at the beginning of the financial year to which they relate.

-- 266 of 625 --

268 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Any revision of the approved annual work programmes, and of any cost estimate, shall
be referred to the Board for approval.
Retention of funds.
8. The earnings of, or accruals to the Fund shall be retained in the Fund, and shall be spent
only for the objects and purposes for which the Fund is established.
Funding eligibility criteria.
9. A tourism implementing agency shall be eligible to apply for funding from the Fund if—
(a) in the case of a state corporation or a government agency—
(i) has an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the
corporation or agency and the medium term plan approved by the governing
body of the state corporation or agency;
(ii) has, in relation to an infrastructure development project, prepared project
designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the governing body and
the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant government institutions;
and
(iii) meets any other criteria set out by the Board.
(b) in case of a Ministry or a State Department, that Ministry or State Department—
(i) has an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the Ministry
or state department and the medium term plan approved by the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for that Ministry or State Department;
(ii) has, in relation to an infrastructure development project, prepared project
designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the Accounting Officer
of that Ministry or State Department and the requisite regulatory approvals
from relevant government institutions; and
(iii) meets any other criteria set out by the Board.
Procedure for funding.
10. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund shall by the 30th August of each year issue a
budget circular to the eligible persons indicating—
(a) the ceilings for funding each objects of the Fund;
(b) priority programmes, projects and activities to be funded in that financial year; and
(c) any other information that the Board may consider necessary.
(2) A person who wishes to receive funding from the Fund and meets the criteria set out
under regulation 9 shall at least, six months before the commencement of a financial year,
apply to the Officer Administering the Fund in such a manner as may be specified by the Board.
(3) An application for funding under paragraph (2) shall be accompanied by—
(a) in case of a state corporation or government agency—
(i) the minutes of a properly constituted meeting of the governing body of the
state corporation or government agency containing the resolution to apply
for funding from the Fund;
(ii) an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the state
corporation or government agency approved by the governing body of that

-- 267 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 269
[Subsidiary]
corporation or agency and the Medium Term Plan approved by the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for that state corporation or government agency;
(iii) where the project is an infrastructure development project, the project
designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the governing body and
the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant government institutions,
where applicable;
(iv) a statutory declaration of programmes funded through other sources, if any;
(v) the details and signatories of the bank account in the name of the state
corporation or government agency where the funds shall be channeled; and
(vi) any other additional information as may be required by the Board.
(c) in the case of a Ministry or State Department—
(i) an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of that Ministry or
State Department and the Medium Term Plan;
(ii) a written confirmation from the accounting officer responsible for that
Ministry or State Department that the there is no other funding for the same
programme, project or activity;
(iii) where it is an infrastructure development project, the project designs, plans
and bills of quantities, approved by the Accounting Officer of that Ministry
or State Department and the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant
government institutions, where applicable;
(iv) an accounting officers' declaration of programmes funded through other
sources, if any;
(v) the details and signatories of the bank account in the name of that Ministry
or State Department where the funds shall be channeled; and
(vi) any other additional information as may be required by the Board.
(3) A maximum of ten per centum (10%) of the approved budget for each financial year
shall be allocated annually by the Board, with the approval of the Cabinet Secretary for the
time being responsible for matters relating to tourism based on the Medium Term Plan of
that Ministry and the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury, to implement strategic
interventions, programmes and initiatives through a tourism implementing agency.
Conditions for disbursements of funds.
11. (1) The funds shall only be disbursed if—
(a) the disbursement is approved and recorded in minutes of the Board; and
(b) the disbursement is to meet the expenses related to the objects and purpose of the
Fund.
(2) The Board may set out other conditions and requirements for release of funds, to
ensure efficient and effective management of resources.
(3) Moneys may additionally be disbursed out of the Fund where such disbursements—
(a) relate to expenditures that did not form part of the approved budget for the
financial year in accordance with provisions of the Act; and
(b) have been approved by the Officer Administering the Fund and submitted to the
Board for further approval.
(4) For purposes of paragraph (3) of this regulation, a supplementary budget shall
be prepared by the Officer Administering the Fund and approved in accordance with the
provisions of regulation 10, provided disbursement under the supplementary budget complies
with the requirements of these Regulations.

-- 268 of 625 --

270 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Obligations of the recipient of funds.
12. (1) A recipient of the funds shall—
(a) submit quarterly and annual progress reports of the programmes, projects and
initiatives funded by the Fund; and
(b) allow staff of the secretariat to monitor and evaluate programmes, projects and
initiatives funded by the Fund.
(2) A recipient of the funds shall return any unutilized funds disbursed in accordance with
these Regulations where—
(a) the purpose for which the funds were disbursed was not undertaken;
(b) the purpose for which the funds were disbursed was undertaken but the funds were
not fully utilized; or
(c) savings are realized as a result of change in circumstances.
(3) Unutilized funds returned under paragraph (2) shall be recorded as receipts of the
Fund.
(4) A recipient of the funds who fails to comply with paragraph (2) and (3) shall not
be eligible for any subsequent disbursement until that person has fully complied with the
provisions of these Regulations.
Request for payment from the Fund.
13. A tourism implementing agency shall only request for payments from the Fund
where—
(a) the project to be financed is procured in accordance with the Public Procurement
and Asset Disposal Act (Cap. 412C);
(b) the project to be financed is included in the approved estimates of revenue and
expenditure for the tourism implementing agency; and
(c) the requirements of regulation 27 are met.
Withholding of payments.
14. The Officer Administering the Fund may withhold payments due and owing to a
tourism implementing agency where—
(a) that tourism implementing agency fails to comply with the provisions of regulation
12;
(b) the Officer Administering the Fund is of the opinion that the provisions of these
Regulations have not been complied with; or
(c) a tourism implementing agency provides information justifying the proposed
withholding with approval of the agency governing body, and the Board approves
the withholding.
Imposition of sanctions.
15. The Board, with the prior approval of the Cabinet Secretary for the time being
responsible for matters relating to tourism and the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury,
may—
(a) impose such penalties, including the suspension of funding allocations, as it may
direct the tourism implementing agencies which fail to comply with any of the
provisions under these Regulations; or

-- 269 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 271
[Subsidiary]
(b) take such remedial, supplementary or alternative measures to ensure the
performance of the functions of tourism implementing agencies which persistently
fail to discharge their functions under these Regulations.
Applications for payments out of the fund.
16. (1) Applications for payment out of the Fund shall be made by a tourism implementing
agency in a format specified by the Board at least twenty-one (21) days before the due date.
(2) Any applications for payment made under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be
supported by documents required under these Regulations which shall include —
(a) the name and address of the payee (tourism implementing agency);
(b) the bank account details of the payee;
(c) specific project to be financed; and
(d) any other additional information as may be deemed necessary by the tourism
implementing agency.
(3) Any application under these Regulations shall be signed by an accounting officer or
the chief executive officer of a tourism implementing agency or an officer delegated by him
or her, in writing.
Establishment and composition of the Board.
17. (1) There is established a board to be known as Oversight Board for the Fund which
shall consist of—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism, who shall be
the chairperson of the Board, or in his or her absence, the Principal Secretary
responsible for matters relating to tourism;
(b) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism;
(c) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to finance;
(d) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to Transport;
(e) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to Culture;
(f) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to wildlife;
(g) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to Internal Security;
(h) two persons of opposite gender appointed by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for
matters relating to tourism in accordance with Article 27 of the Constitution.
(2) A person shall not be appointed under paragraph (1) (h) of this regulation, unless
that—
(a) holds a university degree recognized in Kenya;
(b) has not less than fifteen years' experience in the relevant field; and
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) A person appointed under paragraph (1)(h) of this regulation shall serve for a period
of three (3) years, and the period may be renewed for a further final term of three (3) years.
Functions of the Board.
18. The functions of the Board shall be to—
(a) advise the Cabinet Secretary on the funding requirements of the Fund;

-- 270 of 625 --

272 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) review and adopt the estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund
and recommend them to the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible
for matters relating to tourism for concurrence and onward transmission to the
Cabinet Secretary for approval;
(c) determine the allocation of financial resources from the Fund required by the
tourism implementing agencies for the development, promotion and branding of
tourism sector in Kenya;
(d) ensure that the annual estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fund include
retention funds for the preceding financial year which shall be revoted;
(e) ensure that only projects included in the tourism implementing agency annual
programme are promoted for funding under these Regulations;
(f) advise the Cabinet Secretary on amounts and timing for the fund transfers into the
Fund;
(g) approve and review the investment of surplus funds from the Fund;
(h) advise the Cabinet Secretary on any additional sources of funds for the Fund;
(i) approve the financial statements prepared by the Officer Administering the Fund
before submission to the Auditor-General; and
(j) approve the non-financial reports of the Fund before submitting them to the
Cabinet Secretary responsible for tourism for onward transmission to the National
Treasury.
Appointment of chief executive officer.
19. (1) The Board shall, through a competitive recruitment process, identify and shortlist
three successful persons in order of merit and forward the names to the Cabinet Secretary for
the time being responsible for matters relating to tourism to appoint one of them to be the
Chief Executive Officer of the Fund.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the chief executive officer under
paragraph (1) unless that person—
(a) holds at least a degree from a university recognized in Kenya in the field of tourism,
wildlife, economics, finance, natural resources or any other relevant field;
(b) has at least ten years practical experience in senior management capacity; and
(c) satisfies the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) The chief executive officer of the Fund shall hold office for a term of three years, but
shall be eligible for re-appointment for one further term of three years.
(4) The chief executive officer shall be the Secretary to the Board and shall be responsible
for the day to day running of the Fund including the staff of the secretariat of the Fund.
Officer Administering the Fund.
20. (1) The Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism shall be the
Officer Administering the Fund.
(2) The functions of the Officer Administering the Fund shall be to—
(a) supervise and control the administration of the Fund based on a five year tourism
investment programme approved by the Cabinet Secretary for tourism and the
Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury;

-- 271 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 273
[Subsidiary]
(b) recommend the allocation of financial resources from the Fund required by the
tourism implementing agencies for the development, promotion and branding of
tourism sector in Kenya;
(c) prepare estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund relating to its
purpose and object and operational and maintenance expenses and submit it to
the Board for approval;
(d) establish proper systems of internal control and management in accordance with
the provisions of the Act and these Regulations;
(e) advise and consult the Board on matters relating to the administration of the Fund;
(f) co-ordinate monitoring and evaluation of tourism development, promotion and
branding projects financed from the Fund;
(g) advise and consult with the Cabinet Secretary on matters relating to the
administration of the Fund as may, from time to time, be necessary;
(h) keep proper books of accounts and other books and records relating to the Fund
and the activities financed under the Fund and submit them to the Board;
(i) keep custody of the Funds' assets, equipment and properties under the Fund;
(j) prepare financial and non-financial performance report of the Fund and submit
it to the Board for approval, and upon approval transmit a copy to the National
Treasury and Ministry for matters relating to tourism;
(k) prepare the annual financial statements and submit them to the Board for approval
before submission to the Auditor-General with a copy to the National Treasury and
Ministry for matters relating to tourism;
(l) furnish any additional information which is proper and sufficient for the proper
discharge of the mandate of the Auditor-General; and
(m) undertake any other duty as the Board may assign through resolutions.
(3) When discharging the functions under paragraph (2) of this regulation, the Officer
Administering the Fund shall—
(a) comply with the ordinary budget cycle in the preparation of estimates for the Fund;
and
(b) submit estimates of revenue and expenditure to the Cabinet Secretary by the 31st
January of the preceding financial year for approval.
Power of Officer Administering the Fund.
21. The Officer Administering the Fund shall have power to—
(a) access any project related data he or she may need from tourism implementing
agency in furtherance of his or her functions;
(b) call for any additional information with respect to requests for payments out of the
Fund; and
(c) cause for a monitoring and evaluation exercise to be done to a tourism
implementing agency projects funded from the Fund, and with the approval of the
Board.
Secretariat support for Officer Administering the Fund.
22. (1) The Board shall designate a secretariat to support the operations of the Fund which
shall be headed by the Chief Executive Officer.

-- 272 of 625 --

274 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The Secretariat shall consist of such staff as the Board with the approval of the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism may, in consultation with the Public
Service Commission, consider necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the
Fund under these Regulations.
Accounts of the Fund.
23. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund shall cause an account in the name of the Fund
to be maintained for the Fund in a bank within the Republic of Kenya in line with section 28
of the Act and any Regulations made thereunder.
(2) All monies payable into the Fund shall be received into the bank account of the Fund.
(3) The Fund's accounts shall be operated by the Officer Administering the Fund and two
other persons nominated by the Cabinet Secretary from the Fund's secretariat.
(4) The Officer Administering the Fund may open and maintain other accounts for the
following purposes—
(a) payments for development, promotion and branding of tourism sector:
(b) payments of operational and maintenance expenses; and
(c) receiving receipts of the Fund and unutilized funds by tourism implementing
agencies.
Overdrawn accounts.
24. The Officer Administering the Fund shall ensure the accounts of the Fund are not
overdrawn.
Advances to the Board.
25. (1) The Board shall ensure that in any financial year expenditure and commitments
from the Fund shall not exceed the annual income of the Fund together with any surplus
income brought forward from a previous year.
(2) If, in exceptional circumstances, the income from the Fund or other funds together
with any surplus income brought forward from a previous year is insufficient to meet the
actual or estimated liabilities of the Board and the Fund, the Cabinet Secretary to the National
Treasury may, with the approval of Parliament, make advances to the Board and such advances
shall be made on such terms and conditions, whether as to repayment or otherwise, as the
Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury may determine:
Provided that any such advance shall be repaid from the income of the Fund.
Investments of the funds.
26. The Board may with the consent of the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury
and the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism, invest any of its surplus
funds in Government securities.
Financial and procurement Regulations.
27. The Fund shall be governed by all relevant financial and procurement laws and
regulations as applicable.
Review of performance of the Fund.
28. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall at the elapse of ten years from the date of
commencement of these Regulations cause a review to be conducted on the performance of
the Fund in accordance with the requirements of the Act and Regulations thereunder.

-- 273 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 275
[Subsidiary]
(2) The review shall determine whether the Fund has met the objectives for which it was
established.
(3) The report on the review shall be submitted to the Cabinet and Parliament for approval.
Annual estimates.
29. (1) At least six months before the commencement of each financial year, the Board
shall cause to be prepared estimates of the revenue and expenditure of the Board for that year.
(2) The annual estimates shall make provision for all estimated revenues into and
expenditures from the Fund for the financial year and in particular, the estimates shall provide
for—
(a) revenues projected to be received by the Fund from the sources of funds provided
for under these Regulations;
(b) moneys allocated to tourism implementing agencies under these Regulations;
(c) monies for the administration expenses of the Fund;
(d) the payment of the salaries, allowances and other charges in respect of the staff of
the Board, where applicable;
(e) the payment of pensions, gratuities and other charges in respect of the staff Fund,
where applicable; and
(f) the proper maintenance of the assets, equipment and properties under the Fund.
(3) The annual estimates shall be approved by the Board before the commencement of
the financial year to which they relate and shall be submitted to the Cabinet Secretary for
approval and thereafter, the Board shall not increase or decrease the annual estimates unless
a supplementary budget has been approved in the same manner.
Quarterly reports.
30. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund shall prepare quarterly financial and non-
financial reports in accordance with the format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting
Standards Board and the Act and submit it to the Board for approval.
(2) Upon approval, under paragraph (1), the Officer Administering the Fund shall submit
the report to the National Treasury and Ministry responsible for matters relating to tourism.
Accounts and audit.
31. (1) The Board shall cause to be kept all proper books and records of account of the
income, expenditure, assets, equipment and properties of the Fund.
(2) Within a period of three months from the end of each financial year, the Board shall
submit to the Auditor-General with a copy to the National Treasury, the accounts of the Fund
together with—
(a) a statement of the income and expenditure of the Fund during the financial year;
and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Fund on the last day of that financial
year.
(3) The financial statements prepared under paragraph (2) shall be in accordance with the
prescribed format by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board and the Act.
(4) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and reported upon in accordance with the
Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B).

-- 274 of 625 --

276 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(5) The Board shall inform and keep the public informed of its activities and operations
through regular publications and such activities and operations shall be accessible to the
public unless there are reasons of commercial confidentiality or security justifying exclusions.
Administration expenses.
32. (1) The administrative expenses of the Fund shall not exceed three per centum of the
approved budget of each financial year.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) the Board may, with the concurrence of the
Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to tourism, recommend
increase of the administrative expenses from three per centum to five per centum where there
are justifiable reasons to the Cabinet Secretary for approval for that particular financial year.
Offences and Penalties.
33. A person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists or causes
any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided in
these Regulations, commits an offence and shall, upon conviction, be liable to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding ten million shillings or to both.
Winding-up of the Fund.
34. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may wind-up the Fund with the approval of the National
Assembly where the Cabinet Secretary considers that the Fund has successfully completed
the specific objectives for which it was created.
(2) On winding up of the Fund—
(a) the officer Administering the Fund shall call on the tourism implementing agencies
to submit any valid outstanding obligations and commitments for payment;
(b) the Officer Administering the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund
into the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government;
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from the funds of the
national government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the
National Assembly; and
(d) assets, equipment and properties other than cash of the Fund shall be transferred
to the Ministry for the time being responsible for matters relating to tourism.
(3) Within three months upon the decision to wind up the Fund, the Officer Administering
the Fund shall prepare final financial and non-financial statements of the Fund and submit
them to the Board for approval.
(4) Upon approval under paragraph (3), the administrator shall submit the final financial
and non-financial statements to the Cabinet Secretary.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament and
to the Auditor-General for audit within three months from the date of the decision to wind
up the Fund.

-- 275 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 277
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (BIASHARA KENYA FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Sources of the Fund.
5. Expenditure of the Fund.
6. Capital of the Fund.
7. Object and purpose of the Fund.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
8. Advisory Board.
9. Qualifications of members of the Advisory Board.
10. Functions of the Advisory Board.
11. Administrator of the Fund.
12. Secretariat and chief executive of the Fund.
13. Eligibility criteria.
14. Loan application procedure for direct lending by the Fund.

-- 276 of 625 --

278 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (BIASHARA KENYA FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 78/2019]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Biashara Kenya
Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires —
"Advisory Board" means the Advisory Board constituted under regulation 8;
"Administrator" means the Principal Secretary of the State Department for the time being
responsible for gender affairs or any other person designated by the Cabinet Secretary, in
writing for that purpose;
"borrower" means a person in receipt of a loan out of the Fund;
"Cabinet Secretary" has the same meaning as assigned in section 2 of the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"enterprise" means an undertaking or a business concern, whether formal or informal,
engaged in the production of goods, provision of services or trade in goods;
"financial intermediary" means a credible commercial bank, microfinance institution,
registered non-governmental organisations involved in financing or savings and credit co-
operative organisations;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
"Fund" means the Biashara Kenya Fund established under regulation 3;
"medium enterprise" means a firm, trade, service, industry or a business activity —
(a) whose annual turnover ranges between ten million and one hundred million
shillings;
(b) which employs between fifty and two hundred and fifty people; and
(c) whose total assets and financial investments is between fifty million and two
hundred and fifty million shillings,
"micro enterprise" means a firm, trade, service, industry or a registered business —
(a) whose annual turnover does not exceed two million shillings;
(b) which employs less than ten people; and
(c) whose total assets and financial investments does not exceed ten million shillings;
"small enterprise" means a firm, trade, service, industry or a business activity —
(a) whose annual turnover ranges between two million and ten million shillings; and
(b) which employs between ten and fifty people; and
(c) whose total assets and financial investments is between ten million and fifty
million shillings;
"women" means female persons aged eighteen years and above; and
"youth" has the meaning assigned to it under Article 260 of the Constitution.

-- 277 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 279
[Subsidiary]
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the Biashara Kenya Fund.
Sources of the Fund.
4. The Fund shall consist of —
(a) monies appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Fund;
(b) income-generated from the proceeds of the Fund;
(c) income from investments made by the Fund;
(d) grants, donations, bequests or other gifts made to the Fund; and
(e) monies from any other source approved by the Cabinet Secretary.
Expenditure of the Fund.
5. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in pursuance of the object and purpose for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of, and limited to,
annual budget estimates prepared by the Administrator of, the Fund and recommended by
the Advisory Board to the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for gender affairs
for approval and submission to the Cabinet Secretary, at the beginning of the financial year
to which they relate.
(3) Any revision of the approved budget estimates, and of any cost estimate, shall be
referred to the Advisory Board and the Cabinet Secretary for approval.
Capital of the Fund.
6. The initial capital of the Fund shall be two billion shillings appropriated by Parliament
in the financial year 2019/20 and additional capital of the Fund shall be made in the
subsequent financial years' budgets.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
7. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to —
(a) expand access of finances in promotion of women, youth and persons with
disability enterprises or groups and micro, small and medium enterprises for
economic growth towards the realization of the goals of Vision 2030;
(b) provide loans to credible commercial banks, micro-finance institutions, registered
non-governmental organizations involved in financing, and savings and credit
co-operative organizations for on-lending to women, youth and persons with
disability enterprises or groups and micro, small and medium enterprises;
(c) provide loans directly to women, youth and persons with disability enterprises
or groups and micro, small and medium enterprises for entrepreneurship
development;
(d) attract and facilitate investment in micro, small and medium enterprises oriented
infrastructure such as business, markets or business incubators that will be
beneficial to youth, women, persons with disability enterprises or groups and
micro, small and medium enterprises;
(e) support women, youth and persons with disability enterprises or groups and micro,
small and medium enterprises to develop linkages with large enterprises;

-- 278 of 625 --

280 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(f) facilitate marketing of products and services of youth, women, persons with
disability enterprises or groups and micro, small and medium enterprises in both
domestic, regional and international markets;
(g) facilitate mainstreaming of the interests of the women, youth and persons with
disability enterprises or groups and micro, small and medium enterprises in
bilateral and international trade, investment and agreements;
(h) support capacity building of the beneficiaries of the Fund and their institutions
through training, incubation, mentorship, start-up support and promotion of
innovation and development of products;
(i) facilitate periodic market surveys and data analysis to identify industry
opportunities for women, youth, persons with disability enterprises or groups and
micro, small and medium enterprises; and
(j) promote, develop and facilitate access to government procurement opportunities
by women, youth and persons with disability enterprises or groups and micro, small
and medium enterprises.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
Advisory Board.
8. (1) There shall be a Board to be known as the Advisory Board which shall consist of—
(a) a non-executive Chairperson appointed by the President;
(b) the Principal Secretary of the National Treasury;
(c) the Principal Secretary of the State Department for the time being responsible for
gender affairs;
(d) the Principal Secretary of the State Department for the time being responsible for
matters relating to youth;
(e) the Principal Secretary of the State Department for the time being responsible for
matters relating to micro, small and medium enterprises; and
(f) four other persons, not being public officers, appointed by the Cabinet Secretary
for time being responsible for gender affairs.
(2) The members of the Advisory Board referred to in paragraphs (1)(b), (c), (d) and (e)
may, in writing, appoint suitable persons to represent them at the meetings of the Advisory
Board.
(3) The chairperson and members of the Advisory Board shall serve for a term of three
years but shall, subject to satisfactory performance, be eligible for re-appointment for one
further term of three years, for a maximum of two terms.
Qualifications of members of the Advisory Board.
9. (1) A person shall be eligible for appointment as the chairperson of the Advisory Board
under regulation 8(1)(a) if that person —
(a) possesses a university degree in a relevant field from a university recognised in
Kenya;

-- 279 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 281
[Subsidiary]
(b) has knowledge and experience of not less than ten years in a relevant field,
including —
(i) strategic management;
(ii) enterprise development;
(iii) finance;
(iv) law;
(v) accounting;
(vi) engineering; or
(vii) economics;
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(2) A person shall be eligible for appointment as a member of the Advisory Board under
regulation 8(1)(f) if that person —
(a) has knowledge and relevant experience of not less than five years in
relevant fields including enterprise development, capital fund management,
financial management, gender and development, youth and development, policy
formulation; and
(b) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
Functions of the Advisory Board.
10. The Advisory Board shall—
(a) oversee the administration of the Fund;
(b) advise the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for gender affairs
generally on the operations of the Fund;
(c) receive reports on the performance of the Fund;
(d) develop policy guidelines relating to disbursements by the Fund;
(e) review the estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund and
recommend them to the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for
gender affairs for approval and submission to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for
finance;
(f) review guidelines on the Fund priorities and criteria for allocation and
disbursement of funds to beneficiaries in furtherance of the objects of the Fund;
(g) monitor and evaluate the programmes and activities under the Fund;
(h) review the performance of the Fund and make recommendations on the operations
of the Fund to the administrator of the Fund;
(i) review and approve the financial statements of the Fund before submission to the
Auditor General;
(j) review policy on the management of assets, equipment and all properties under
the Fund;
(k) prescribe other guidelines for use by the Fund;
(l) mobilize resources for the Fund to be paid into the Fund; and
(m) undertake any other activity that in the opinion of the Advisory Board, will promote
and facilitate realization of the objects and purposes of the Fund.

-- 280 of 625 --

282 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Administrator of the Fund.
11. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall be the Principal Secretary of the State
Department for the time being responsible for gender affairs or any other person designated
by the Cabinet Secretary, in writing for that purpose.
(2) In administering the Fund, the Administrator shall —
(a) open and operate a bank account with the approval of the Advisory Board and the
National Treasury;
(b) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(c) consult with the Advisory Board on matters relating to the administration of the
Fund;
(d) cause to be kept books of accounts and other books and records in relation to the
Fund of all activities and undertakings financed from the Fund;
(e) enter into and sign agreements with all successful applicants or financial
intermediaries providing affordable and accessible credit to women, youth, persons
with disability enterprises and micro, small and medium enterprises;
(f) open loan accounts of all successful applicants or financial intermediaries and
maintain a record of the amount disbursed and the balance thereof;
(g) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General, in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to
the Fund and showing the expenditure incurred from the Fund, and such details as
the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board may prescribe from time to time, in
accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A)
and Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B); and
(h) furnish such additional information as may be considered proper and sufficient for
the purpose of examination and audit by the Auditor-General in accordance with
the provisions of the Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B).
(3) Every statement of account shall include details of the balance between the assets and
liabilities of the Fund, and shall indicate the financial status of the Fund as at the end of the
financial year to which they relate.
Secretariat and chief executive of the Fund.
12. There shall be a secretariat of the Fund, headed by a Chief Executive Officer, which
shall be responsible for the day-to-day running of the affairs of the Fund, and the Chief Officer
Executive and staff of the secretariat shall be appointed competitively in consultation with
the Public Service Commission.
Eligibility criteria.
13. (1) A woman, youth, person with disability and micro, small and medium enterprise
shall be eligible to apply for a loan for business purposes from the Fund if —
(a) in the case of a group, is registered with the department of social services,
Cooperatives or the Registrar of Societies; an
(i) at least seventy percent of the membership is aged between 18 and 35 years;
(ii) at least seventy per cent of the membership is composed of women aged
eighteen years and above; or
(iii) at least seventy per cent of the membership is composed of persons with
disability aged eighteen years and above.

-- 281 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 283
[Subsidiary]
(b) in the case of an enterprise owned by women, youth, persons with disability,
micro, small and medium enterprises registered under the Registration of Business
Names Act (Cap. 499), Partnerships Act (Cap. 29), Companies (Act (Cap. 486) or
Co-operatives Act (Cap. 490);
(c) in the case of unregistered business, the person shall have a business permit and a
P. I. N issued by the Kenya Revenue Authority; or
(d) in the case of a natural person, the person shall demonstrate that he or she is
running an enterprise or intends to start an enterprise.
(2) Women, youth and persons with disability enterprises shall be given a preference while
processing loans by the Fund.
Loan application procedure for direct lending by the Fund.
14. (1) A person who meets the criteria set out in regulation 13 and wishes to borrow
a loan from the Fund shall make an application to the Administrator of the Fund in such a
manner as may be prescribed by the Advisory Board.
(2) An application for a loan under subregulation (1) shall be accompanied by —
(a) in case of a group —
(i) certificate of registration;
(ii) minutes of the group's resolution to borrow from the Fund where applicable;
and
(iii) copies of identification documents of all the group members;
(b) in the case of an enterprise owned by women, youth, persons with disability, micro,
small and medium enterprises registered under the Registration of Business Names
Act, Partnerships Act, Companies Act or Co-operatives Act—
(i) certificate of registration;
(ii) an official search document under the Companies Act, where applicable;
(iii) minutes of the resolution to borrow from the Fund where applicable; and
(iv) copies of identification documents of all the persons who own the
enterprise; or
(c) in a case of unregistered business—
(i) copies of personal identification documents; and
(ii) or business permit.
(d) in case of a person who has demonstrated that he or she is running an enterprise
or intends to start an enterprise, a national identification document.
(3) The Administrator of the Fund shall use the following criteria when evaluating a loan
application —
(a) first in first out principle of loan processing;
(b) give preference to women, youth and persons with disability enterprises;
(c) applicable loan threshold for each category of applicant based on the ratio of the
maximum amount applied for to the annual turn-over of the applicant's business
or projected annual turn-over for start-ups;
(d) compliance with the provisions of sub regulation (2);
(e) ability to repay the loan within the stipulated loan tenure;

-- 282 of 625 --

284 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(f) an undertaking by the beneficiary that the loan shall only be used for the purpose
of the business applied for until the loan is repaid in full by the beneficiary;
(g) no borrower shall be eligible for more than one loan at a time from the Fund;
(h) an undertaking by the applicant to notify the Secretariat of the Fund of any change
in physical address; and
(i) any other conditions as may be prescribed by the Advisory Board.

-- 283 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 285
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (TOURISM PROMOTION FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Capital of the Fund.
5. Object and purpose.
6. Sources of funds.
7. Payment out of the Fund.
9. Funding eligibility criteria.
10. Procedure for funding.
11. Conditions for disbursements of funds.
12. Obligations of the recipient of funds.
13. Request for payment from the Fund.
14. Establishment and composition of the Board.
15. Functions of the Board.
16. Withholding of payments.
17. Imposition of sanctions.
18. Applications for payments out of the fund.
19. Appointment of chief executive officer.
20. Administrator of the Fund.
21. Powers of Administrator of the Fund.
22. Secretariat support for Administrator of the Fund.
23. Accounts of the Fund.
24. Overdrawn accounts.
25. Advances to the Board.
26. Investments of the funds.
27. Financial and procurement Regulations.
28. Review of performance of the Fund.
29. Annual estimates.
30. Quarterly reports.
31. Accounts and audit.
32. Administration expenses.
33. Offences and Penalties.
34. Winding-up of the Fund.

-- 284 of 625 --

286 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (TOURISM PROMOTION FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 24/2019]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Tourism Promotion
Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires —
"Administrator of the Fund" means the Chief Executive Officer designated as such under
regulation 20 of these Regulations;
"Board" means the Oversight Board established under regulation 16;
"Cabinet Secretary" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"Fund" means the Tourism Promotion Fund established under regulation 3 of these
Regulations;
"operational and maintenance expenses" means moneys included in the approved annual
budget of the Fund dedicated to meeting the routine administrative expenses of the
Secretariat;
"plugging projects" means projects which support the development, promotion and
branding of tourism in Kenya;
"tourism events" means natural phenomena or human scheduled activity which attract
visitors to a particular area as organizers, participants, spectators or service providers to
support the activity or a combination of several purpose of engagement including wildebeest
migration, observation of eclipse, exhibition, conferences, sporting events, cultural festivals
and dances;
"tourism implementing agency” means a government agency involved in the
development, promotion and branding of tourism in Kenya;
"tourism niche product" means an attraction, good or service of special appeal and of
specific interest to a particular market segment; and
"tourism product" means an attraction, good or service which contributes to the total
visitor or tourist experience in a destination including wildlife, culture, rivers, beaches,
historical sites, museums, hotels and artefacts.
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a fund to be known as the Tourism Promotion Fund which shall
operate under the budgeting, accounting, reporting and auditing framework of the Act.
Capital of the Fund.
4. The initial capital of the Fund shall be 200 million shillings appropriated by Parliament
in the financial year 2018/19.
Object and purpose.
5. (1) The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide funds to support
development, promotion and branding of tourism sector.

-- 285 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 287
[Subsidiary]
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1) of this regulation, the Fund shall
provide for—
(a) financing development, promotion and branding programmes and initiatives in
relation to tourism products including tourism niche products and tourism events;
(b) financing marketing, promotion and branding of Kenya in specific local, regional
and international market segments;
(c) financing tourism data capture, analysis and dissemination of the same and
any other related research which may include deployment of technology based
applications;
(d) financing development of tourism facilities and establishments in areas where
the private sector is unable or unwilling to develop, but with a high potential for
tourism promotion and branding;
(e) co-financing of tourism development and promotion projects with the county
governments on the basis of an agreed ratio of matching grants;
(f) funding programmes and initiatives for tourism safety and security geared towards
development, promotion and branding of tourism sector;
(g) financing development of innovations and inventions which promote tourism
development, promotion and branding;
(h) funding of plugging projects which contribute to development, promotion and
branding of tourism sector;
(i) financing programmes and initiatives geared towards tourism intelligence and
information gathering for purposes of developing, promoting and branding
tourism in Kenya; and
(j) standards development and capacity building in the tourism sector.
Sources of funds.
6. The Fund shall consist of—
(a) proceeds realised under section 3 of the Air Passengers Service Charge Act (Cap.
475);
(b) moneys appropriated by the National Assembly for the purpose of the Fund;
(c) income from investments of any surplus funds in the Fund;
(d) interest accruing to the Fund;
(e) grants, donations or other bequests made to the Fund;
(f) moneys paid into the Fund from any other source as may from time to time be
approved by the Cabinet Secretary; and
(g) any other moneys as may be provided for in an Act of Parliament.
Payment out of the Fund.
7. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund monies in respect of any expenses incurred in
pursuance of the objects and purposes for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred out of the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
work programmes and cost estimates which shall be prepared by the Administrator of the
Fund and approved by the Board at the beginning of the financial year to which they relate.

-- 286 of 625 --

288 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Any revision of the approved annual work programmes, and of any cost estimate, shall
be referred to the Board for approval.
Funding eligibility criteria.
9. A tourism implementing agency shall be eligible to apply for funding from the Fund if—
(a) in the case of a state corporation or a government agency—
(i) has an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the
corporation or agency and the medium term plan approved by the governing
body of the state corporation or agency;
(ii) has, in the case of an infrastructure development project, prepared project
designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the governing body and
the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant government institutions;
and
(iii) meets any other criteria set out by the Board.
(b) in case of a Ministry or a State Department, that Ministry or State Department —
(i) has an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the Ministry
or state department and the medium term plan approved By the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for that Ministry or State Department;
(ii) has, in the case of an infrastructure development project, prepared project
designs, plans and bills of quantities, approved by the accounting officer of
that Ministry or State Department and the requisite regulatory approvals
from relevant government institutions; and
(iii) meets any other criteria set out by the Board.
Procedure for funding.
10. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall by the 30th August of each year issue a budget
circular to the eligible persons indicating—
(a) the ceilings for funding each objects of the Fund;
(b) priority programmes, projects and activities to be funded in that financial year; and
(c) any other information that the Board may consider necessary.
(2) A person who wishes to receive funding from the Fund and meets the criteria set out
under regulation 9 shall at least six months before the commencement of a financial year
apply to the Administrator of the Fund in such a manner as may be specified by the Board.
(3) An application for funding under paragraph (2) shall be accompanied by—
(a) In case of a state corporation or government agency —
(i) the minutes of a properly constituted meeting of the governing body of the
state corporation or government agency containing the resolution to apply
for funding from the Fund;
(ii) an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of the state
corporation or government agency approved by the governing body of that
corporation or agency and the Medium Term Plan approved by the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for that state corporation or government agency;
(iii) where the project is an infrastructure development project, the project
designs, plans and bills of quantities approved by the governing body and

-- 287 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 289
[Subsidiary]
the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant government institutions,
where applicable;
(iv) a statutory declaration of programmes funded through other sources, if any;
(v) the details and signatories of the bank account in the name of the state
corporation or government agency where the funds shall be channeled; and
(vi) any other additional information as may be required by the Board
(b) in the case of a Ministry or State Department—
(i) an annual work programme aligned to the strategic plan of that Ministry or
State Department and the Medium Term Plan;
(ii) a written confirmation from the accounting officer responsible for that
Ministry or State Department that the there is no other funding for the same
programme, project or activity;
(iii) where it is an infrastructure development project, the project designs, plans
and bills of quantities approved by the accounting officer of that Ministry
or State Department and the requisite regulatory approvals from relevant
government institutions, where applicable;
(iv) an accounting officers' declaration of programmes funded through other
sources, if any;
(v) the details and signatories of the bank account in the name of that Ministry
or State Department where the funds shall be channeled; and
(vi) any other additional information as may be required by the Board.
(4) A maximum of ten per centum (10%) of the approved budget for each financial year
shall be allocated annually by the Board, with the approval of the Cabinet Secretary for the
time being responsible for matters relating to tourism based on the Medium Term Plan of
that Ministry and the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury, to implement strategic
interventions, programmes and initiatives through a tourism implementing agency.
Conditions for disbursements of funds.
11. (1) The funds shall only be disbursed if—
(a) the disbursement is approved and recorded in minutes of the Board; and
(b) the disbursement is to meet the expenses related to the objects and purpose of the
Fund.
(2) The Board may set out other conditions and requirements for release of funds, to
ensure efficient and effective management of resources.
(3) Moneys may additionally be disbursed out of the Fund where such disbursements—
(a) relate to expenditures that did not form part of the approved budget for the
financial year in accordance with provisions of the Act; and
(b) have been approved by the Administrator of the Fund and submitted to the Board
for approval.
(4) For purposes of paragraph (3) of this regulation, a supplementary budget shall be
prepared by the Administrator of the Fund and approved in accordance with the provisions
of regulation 10, provided disbursement under the supplementary budget complies with the
requirements of these Regulations.

-- 288 of 625 --

290 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Obligations of the recipient of funds.
12. (1) A recipient of the funds shall—
(a) submit quarterly and annual progress reports of the programmes, projects and
initiatives funded by the Fund; and
(b) allow staff of the secretariat to monitor and evaluate programmes, projects and
initiatives funded by the Fund.
(2) A recipient of the funds shall return any unutilized funds disbursed in accordance with
these Regulations where—
(a) the purpose for which the funds were disbursed was not undertaken;
(b) the purpose for which the funds were disbursed was undertaken but the funds were
not fully utilized; or
(c) savings are realized as a result of change in circumstances.
(3) Unutilized funds returned under paragraph (2) shall be recorded as receipts of the
Fund.
(4) A recipient of the funds who fails to comply with paragraph (2) and (3) shall not
be eligible for any subsequent disbursement until that person has fully complied with the
provisions of these Regulations.
Request for payment from the Fund.
13. A tourism implementing agency shall only request for payments from the Fund
where—
(a) the project to be financed is procured in accordance with the Public Procurement
and Asset Disposal Act (Cap. 412C);
(b) the project to be financed is included in the approved estimates of revenue and
expenditure for the tourism implementing agency; and
(c) the requirements of regulation 11 are met.
Establishment and composition of the Board.
14. (1) There is established a board to be known as Oversight Board for the Fund which
shall consist of—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism, who shall be
the chairperson of the Board, or in his or her absence, the Principal Secretary
responsible for matters relating to tourism;
(b) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism;
(c) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to finance;
(d) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to Transport;
(e) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to Culture;
(f) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to wildlife;
(g) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to Internal Security;
(h) two persons of opposite gender appointed by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for
matters relating to tourism in accordance with Article 27 of the Constitution.

-- 289 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 291
[Subsidiary]
(2) A person shall not be appointed under paragraph (1)(h) of this regulation, unless that
person—
(a) holds a university degree recognized in Kenya;
(b) has not less than fifteen years' experience in the relevant field; and
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) A person appointed under paragraph (1)(h) of this regulation shall serve for a period
of three (3) years, and the period may be renewed for a further final term of three (3) years.
Functions of the Board.
15. The funds under the Fund shall be disbursed under the following conditions—
(a) to advise the Cabinet Secretary on the funding requirements of the Fund;
(b) to review and adopt the estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund
and recommend them to the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible
for matters relating to tourism for concurrence and onward transmission to the
Cabinet Secretary for approval;
(c) to determine the allocation of financial resources from the Fund required by the
tourism implementing agencies for the development, promotion and branding of
tourism sector in Kenya;
(d) to ensure that the annual estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fund
include retention funds for the preceding financial year which shall be revoted;
(e) to ensure that only projects included in the tourism implementing agency annual
programme are promoted for funding under these Regulations;
(f) to advise the Cabinet Secretary on amounts and timing for the fund transfers into
the Fund;
(g) to approve and review the investment of surplus funds from the Fund;
(h) to advise the Cabinet Secretary on any additional sources of funds for the Fund;
(i) to approve the financial statements prepared by the Administrator of the Fund
before submission to the Auditor-General; and
(j) to approve the non-financial reports of the Fund before submitting them to the
Cabinet Secretary responsible for tourism for onward transmission to the National
Treasury.
Withholding of payments.
16. The Administrator of the Fund may withhold payments due and owing to a tourism
implementing agency where—
(a) that tourism implementing agency fails to comply with the provisions of regulation
12;
(b) the Administrator of the Fund is of the opinion that the provisions of these
Regulations have not been complied with; or
(c) a tourism implementing agency provides information justifying the proposed
withholding with approval of the agency governing body; and
(d) the Board approves the withholding.

-- 290 of 625 --

292 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Imposition of sanctions.
17. The Board, with the prior approval of the Cabinet Secretary for the time being
responsible for matters relating g to tourism and the Cabinet Secretary to the National
Treasury, may—
(a) impose such penalties, including the suspension of funding allocations, as it may
direct the tourism implementing agencies which fail to comply with any of the
provisions under these Regulations; or
(b) take such remedial, supplementary or alternative measures to ensure the
performance of the functions of tourism implementing agencies which persistently
fail to discharge their functions under these Regulations.
Applications for payments out of the fund.
18. (1) Applications for payment out of the Fund shall be made by a tourism implementing
agency in a format specified by the Board at least 21 days before the due date.
(2) Any applications for payment made under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be
supported by documents required under these Regulations which shall include—
(a) the name and address of the payee (tourism implementing agency);
(b) the bank account details of the payee;
(c) specific project to be financed; and
(d) any other additional information as may be deemed necessary by the tourism
implementing agency.
(3) Any application under these Regulations shall be signed by an accounting officer or
the chief executive officer of a tourism implementing agency or an officer delegated by him
or her, in writing.
Appointment of chief executive officer.
19. (1) The Board shall, through a competitive recruitment process, identify and shortlist
three successful persons in order of merit and forward the names to the Cabinet Secretary for
the time being responsible for matters relating to tourism to appoint one of them to be the
Chief Executive Officer of the Fund.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the chief executive officer under
paragraph (1) unless that person—
(a) holds at least a degree from a university recognized in Kenya in the field of tourism,
wildlife, economics, finance, natural resources or any other relevant field;
(b) has at least ten years practical experience in senior management capacity; and
(c) satisfies the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) The chief executive officer of the Fund shall hold office for a term of three years and
shall be eligible for re-appointment for one further term of three years.
(4) The chief executive officer shall be the Secretary to the Board and shall be responsible
for the day to day running of the Fund including the staff of the secretariat of the Fund.
Administrator of the Fund.
20. (1) The chief executive officer appointed under regulation 19 shall be the
Administrator of the Fund.

-- 291 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 293
[Subsidiary]
(2) The functions of the Administrator of the Fund shall be to —
(a) supervise and control the administration of the Fund based on a five year tourism
investment programme approved by the Cabinet Secretary for tourism and the
Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury;
(b) recommend the allocation of financial resources from the Fund required by the
tourism implementing agencies for the development, promotion and branding of
tourism sector in Kenya;
(c) prepare estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund relating to its
purpose and object and operational and maintenance expenses and submit it to
the Board for approval;
(d) establish proper systems of internal control and management in accordance with
the provisions of the Act and these Regulations;
(e) advise and consult the Board on matters relating to the administration of the Fund;
(f) co-ordinate monitoring and evaluation of tourism development, promotion and
branding projects financed from the Fund;
(g) advise and consult with the Cabinet Secretary on matters relating to the
administration of the Fund as may, from time to time, be necessary;
(h) keep proper books of accounts and other books and records relating to the Fund
and the activities financed under the Fund and submit them to the Board;
(i) keep custody of the Funds' assets, equipment and properties under the Fund;
(j) prepare financial and non-financial performance report of the Fund and submit
it to the Board for approval, and upon approval transmit a copy to the National
Treasury and Ministry for matters relating to tourism;
(k) prepare the annual financial statements and submit them to the Board for approval
before submission to the Auditor-General with a copy to the National Treasury and
Ministry for matters relating to tourism;
(l) furnish any additional information which is proper and sufficient for the proper
discharge of the mandate of the Auditor-General; and
(m) undertake any other duty as the Board may assign through resolutions.
(3) When discharging the functions under paragraph (2) of this regulation, the
Administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) comply with the ordinary budget cycle in the preparation of estimates for the Fund;
and
(b) submit estimates of revenue and expenditure to the Cabinet Secretary by the
31stJanuary of the preceding financial year for approval.
Powers of Administrator of the Fund.
21. The Administrator of the Fund shall have power to —
(a) access any project related data he or she may need from tourism implementing
agency in furtherance of his or her functions;
(b) call for any additional information with respect to requests for payments out of the
Fund; and

-- 292 of 625 --

294 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) cause for a monitoring and evaluation exercise to be done to a tourism
implementing agency projects funded from the Fund, and with the approval of the
Board.
Secretariat support for Administrator of the Fund.
22. (1) The Board shall designate a secretariat to support the operations of the Fund which
shall be headed by the Chief Executive Officer.
(2) The Secretariat shall consist of such staff as the Board with the approval of the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism may, in consultation with the Public
Service Commission, consider necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the
Fund under these Regulations.
Accounts of the Fund.
23. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall cause an account in the name of the Fund to
be maintained for the Fund in a bank within the Republic of Kenya in line with section 28 of
the Act and any Regulations made thereunder.
(2) All monies payable into the Fund shall be received into the bank account of the Fund.
(3) The Fund's accounts shall be operated by the Administrator of the Fund and two other
persons nominated by the Cabinet Secretary from the Fund's secretariat.
(4) The Administrator of the Fund may open and maintain other accounts for the following
purposes—
(a) payments for development, promotion and branding of tourism sector;
(b) payments of operational and maintenance expenses; and
(c) receiving receipts of the Fund and unutilized funds by tourism implementing
agencies.
Overdrawn accounts.
24. The Administrator of the Fund shall ensure the accounts of the Fund are not
overdrawn.
Advances to the Board.
25. (1) The Board shall ensure that in any financial year expenditure and commitments
from the Fund shall not exceed the annual income of the Fund together with any surplus
income brought forward from a previous year.
(2) If, in exceptional circumstances, the income from the Fund or other funds together
with any surplus income brought forward from a previous year is insufficient to meet the
actual or estimated liabilities of the Board and the Fund, the Cabinet Secretary to the National
Treasury may, with the approval of Parliament, make advances to the Board and such advances
shall be made on such terms and conditions, whether as to repayment or otherwise, as the
Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury may determine:
Provided that any such advance shall be repaid from the income of the Fund.
Investments of the funds.
26. The Board may with the consent of the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury
and the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to tourism, invest any of its surplus
funds in Government securities.

-- 293 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 295
[Subsidiary]
Financial and procurement Regulations.
27. The Fund shall be governed by all relevant financial and procurement laws and
regulations as applicable.
Review of performance of the Fund.
28. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall at the elapse of ten years from the date of
commencement of these Regulations cause a review to be conducted on the performance
of the Fund in accordance with the requirements of the Act and Regulations thereunder.
(2) The review shall determine whether the Fund has met the objectives for which it was
established.
(3) The report on the review shall be submitted to the Cabinet and Parliament for approval.
Annual estimates.
29. (1) At least six months before the commencement of each financial year, the Board
shall cause to be prepared estimates of the revenue and expenditure of the Board for that year.
(2) The annual estimates shall make provision for all estimated revenues into and
expenditures from the Fund for the financial year and in particular, the estimates shall provide
for—
(a) revenues projected to be received by the Fund from the sources of funds provided
for under these Regulations;
(b) moneys allocated to tourism implementing agencies under these Regulations;
(c) monies for the administration expenses of the Fund;
(d) the payment of the salaries, allowances and other charges in respect of the staff of
the Board, where applicable;
(e) the payment of pensions, gratuities and other charges in respect of the staff Fund,
where applicable; and
(f) the proper maintenance of the assets, equipment and properties under the Fund.
(3) The annual estimates shall be approved by the Board before the commencement of
the financial year to which they relate and shall be submitted to the Cabinet Secretary for
approval and thereafter, the Board shall not increase or decrease the annual estimates unless
a supplementary budget has been approved in the same manner.
Quarterly reports.
30. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall prepare quarterly financial and non-financial
reports in accordance with the format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards
Board and the Act and submit it to the Board for approval.
(2) Upon approval, under paragraph (1), the Administrator of the Fund shall submit the
report to the National Treasury and Ministry responsible for matters relating to tourism.
Accounts and audit.
31. (1) The Board shall cause to be kept all proper books and records of account of the
income, expenditure, assets, equipment and properties of the Fund.

-- 294 of 625 --

296 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) Within a period of three months from the end of each financial year, the Board shall
submit to the Auditor-General with a copy to the National Treasury, the accounts of the Fund
together with—
(a) a statement of the income and expenditure of the Fund during the financial year;
and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Fund on the last day of that financial
year.
(3) The financial statements prepared under paragraph (2) shall be in accordance with the
prescribed format by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board and the Act.
(4) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and reported upon in accordance with the
Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B)
(5) The Board shall inform and keep the public informed of its activities and operations
through regular publications and such activities and operations shall be accessible to the
public unless there are reasons of commercial confidentiality or security justifying exclusions.
Administration expenses.
32. (1) The administrative expenses of the Fund shall not exceed three per centum of the
approved budget of each financial year.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) the Board may, with the concurrence of the
Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to tourism, recommend
increase of the administrative expenses from three per centum to five per centum where there
are justifiable reasons to the Cabinet Secretary for approval for that particular financial year.
Offences and Penalties.
33. A person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists or causes
any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided in
these Regulations, commits an offence and shall, upon conviction, be liable to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding ten million shillings or to both.
Winding-up of the Fund.
34. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may wind-up the Fund with the approval of the National
Assembly where the Cabinet Secretary considers that the Fund has successfully completed
the specific objectives for which it was created.
(2) On winding up of the Fund—
(a) the Administrator of the Fund shall call on the tourism implementing agencies to
submit any valid outstanding obligations and commitments for payment;
(b) the Administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into
the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government;
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from the funds of the
national government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the
National Assembly; and
(d) assets, equipment and properties other than cash of the Fund shall be transferred
to the Ministry for the time being responsible for matters relating to tourism.
(3) Within three months upon the decision to wind up the Fund, the administrator of the
Fund shall prepare final financial and non-financial statements of the Fund and submit them
to the Board for approval.

-- 295 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 297
[Subsidiary]
(4) Upon approval under paragraph (3), the administrator shall submit the final financial
and non-financial statements to the Cabinet Secretary.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament and
to the Auditor-General for audit within three months from the date of the decision to wind
up the Fund.

-- 296 of 625 --

298 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (COFFEE
CHERRY ADVANCE REVOLVING FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
3. Establishment of The Fund.
4. Object and purpose of the Fund.
5. Sources of the Fund.
6. Expenditure of the Fund.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
7. Functions of the Board.
8. Administrator of the Fund.
PART IV – OPERATION OF THE FUNDS
9. Eligibility.
10. Application procedure.
11. Coffee advance approval thresholds.
12. Evaluation of applications.
13. Coffee advance payment rate.
14. Coffee advance disbursement procedure.
15. Recovery of administration costs.
16. Recovery mechanism.
PART V – FINANCIAL PROVISION
17. Bank accounts for the Fund.
18. Overdrawn accounts.
19. Expenditure of the Fund.
20. Withdrawals from the Fund.
21. Financial and procurement Regulations.
22. Investments of the Fund.
23. Annual estimates.
24. Miscellaneous disclosures.
25. Quarterly reports.
26. Accounts of the Fund.
27. Audit of accounts.
28. Annual performance report.
PART VI – GENERAL PROVISIONS
29. Winding up of the Fund.
30. Offences and penalties.
31. Guidelines.
32. Revocation of LN 201 of 2019.

-- 297 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 299
[Subsidiary]
SCHEDULE — FORMS

-- 298 of 625 --

300 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (COFFEE
CHERRY ADVANCE REVOLVING FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 29/2020]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Coffee Cherry
Advance Revolving Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Act" means the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"administrator" means the person designated as the Administrator of the Fund under
regulation 8;
"advance payment rate" means the advance payment rates set out in regulation 13;
"affiliation" means registered with the New Kenya Planters Co- operative Union Limited;
"agent" means a person contracted by New Kenya Planters Co- operative Union Limited,
for the purposes of—
(a) processing loan applications;
(b) disbursing or recovery of loans advanced; and
(c) any other function assigned by the New Kenya Planters Co- operative Union
Limited;
"Board" means the New Kenya Planters Co-operative Union Board managing the New
Kenya Planters Co-operative Union Limited;
"coffee" means cherry, buni or parchment;
"co-operative society" has the meaning assigned to it under the Co-operative Societies Act
(Cap. 490);
"Fund" means the Coffee Cherry Advance Revolving Fund established under regulation 3;
"New Kenya Planters Co-operative Union Limited" means the body incorporated under the
Companies Act (Cap. 486);
"small holder coffee estate" means a grower licensed by the county government with an
area of land or parcels land under coffee not less than five acres and not more than twenty
acres; and
"small holder coffee grower" means a coffee grower with an area of land or parcels of land
under coffee of not more than twenty acres.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of The Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the Coffee Cherry Advance Revolving Fund.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
4. The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide affordable, sustainable and
accessible cherry advance to smallholder coffee growers and small holder coffee estates.

-- 299 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 301
[Subsidiary]
Sources of the Fund.
5. The Fund shall consist of—
(a) monies appropriated by Parliament for purposes of the Fund;
(b) recoveries for administration costs relating to coffee cherry advance by Fund;
(c) grants, donations, bequests or other gifts made to the Fund;
(d) monies from any other source approved by the Cabinet Secretary; and
(e) income derived from investment of surplus funds.
Expenditure of the Fund.
6. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in pursuance of the objects and purpose for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual work
programmes and cost estimates which shall be prepared by the Administrator at the beginning
of every Financial Year and approved by the Board.
(3) Any revision of the approved work programmes and of any cost estimates shall be
approved by the Board.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
Functions of the Board.
7. The functions of the Board with regards to this Fund shall be to—
(a) oversee the administration of the Fund;
(b) develop policies relating to the general administration and management of the
Fund;
(c) develop policies and procedures relating to application, disbursement and recovery
of coffee cherry advances;
(d) develop a standard coffee advance agreement;
(e) approve the opening and closing of bank accounts in accordance with the Act;
(f) receive, review and approve the annual estimates of revenue and expenditure of
the Fund and submit to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for the matters relating
to co- operatives for concurrence and submit to the Cabinet Secretary for approval;
(g) oversee the monitoring and evaluation of the programmes and activities of the
Fund;
(h) review the performance of the Fund and make recommendations on the operations
of the Fund to the administrator of the Fund;
(i) consider, review and approve the annual financial and non-financial statements of
the Fund prepared in accordance with the Act in the format prescribed by the Public
Sector Accounting Standards Board for submission to the Auditor General with a
copy to the National Treasury, Commission for Revenue Allocation, and Controller
of Budget;
(j) consider, review and approve policies on the management of assets, equipment and
all properties under the Fund;
(k) consider, review and approve the investment policies for the investment of surplus
funds;

-- 300 of 625 --

302 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(l) receive, review and approve reports on the performance of the Fund;
(m) decentralize its services, in so far as practically possible, to the coffee growing
areas;
(n) consult with the Cabinet Secretary on matters relating to the administration of
Fund; and
(o) perform any other functions that shall be assigned by the Cabinet Secretary.
Administrator of the Fund.
8. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall designate in writing, the Administrator of the Fund, in
accordance with section 24(5) the Act.
(2) The Administrator shall exercise the following functions—
(a) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(b) develop a predictable, transparent and accountable financial internal control
systems for the Fund;
(c) prepare estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund relating to its
obligations and operational expenses and submit it to the Board for adoption;
(d) cause to be established proper systems of control and oversight under the
provisions of the Act;
(e) consult and advise the Board on matters relating to the administration of the Fund;
(f) consult and advise with the Cabinet Secretary on matters relating to the
administration of the Fund as may, from time to time, be necessary;
(g) prepare non-financial performance report of the Fund and submit it to the Board
for adoption;
(h) be the custodian of the properties, assets and equipment of the Fund;
(i) open individual loan ledger accounts for each loan approved by the Board;
(j) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records relating to
the Fund and the activities financed under the Fund;
(k) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of account relating to
the Fund in such form as the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board established
under the Act; and
(l) furnish any additional information which is proper and sufficient for the proper
discharge of the mandate of the Auditor-General.
PART IV – OPERATION OF THE FUNDS
Eligibility.
9. (1) A small holder coffee estate or small holder coffee grower shall be eligible to benefit
from the Fund if that person is—
(a) a citizen of Kenya; and
(b) a member of a registered coffee co-operative society; or
(c) affiliated to New Kenya Planters Co-operative Union Limited.

-- 301 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 303
[Subsidiary]
(2) In addition to the eligibility criteria set out in sub-regulation (1), a person desirous of
accessing the monies in the Fund shall apply for the coffee advance and meet the following
conditions—
(a) in the case of a member of a registered coffee co-operative society, have—
(i) a national identity card or passport; and
(ii) a membership card of a co-operative society;
(b) in the case of a smallholder coffee estate, who is affiliated to New Kenya Planters
Co-operative Union Limited, have—
(i) a national identity card or passport; and
(ii) a membership card of the New Kenya Planters Co- operative Union Limited.
Application procedure.
10. (1) A person who meets the criteria and conditions set out in regulation 9 shall—
(a) in the case of a member of a registered coffee co-operative society, apply in the
manner set out in Form 1A of the Schedule; and
(b) in the case of a smallholder estate affiliated to New Kenya Planters Co-operative
Union Limited, apply in the manner set out in Form 1B of the Schedule.
(2) The Board may provide further policies on the application procedure.
Coffee advance approval thresholds.
11. (1) The Board shall provide thresholds for coffee advances which may be approved
by the Administrator.
(2) Any coffee advances approved under sub-regulation (1) shall be tabled by the
Administrator in the subsequent meeting of the Board.
Evaluation of applications.
12. (1) Upon receipt of an application the Administrator shall evaluate the application
to ensure compliance with these Regulations and coffee advance evaluation procedures
approved by the Board.
(2) The Administrator shall, after evaluation of the application in sub-regulation (1), make
recommendation to the Board to either approve or reject the application.
(3) The Administrator shall process the applications on a first come first serve basis.
(4) Where the Board rejects an application under these Regulations the Board shall give
reasons for such decision within fourteen days of such decision.
(5) An applicant whose application has been rejected may re- submit the application upon
fulfillment of the requirements set in these Regulations.
(6) Any decision of the Board shall be communicated to the applicant within fourteen
days from the date of the decision of the Board.
(7) Any applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Board to reject his application
for a coffee advance may apply to the Board for review of the decision.
Coffee advance payment rate.
13. (1) A member of a registered cooperative society or a smallholder estate affiliated to
New Kenya Planters Co-operative Union Limited shall be advanced—
(a) forty per-centum of the prevailing average sales price at the Coffee Exchange;

-- 302 of 625 --

304 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) twenty shillings per kilogram of cherry delivered; or
(c) forty per-centum of the payment rate to members by a co- operative society for the
immediate past crop year.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary may review the rates provided under sub regulation (1) upon
the recommendation of the Board.
Coffee advance disbursement procedure.
14. (1) The Board shall develop the procedures for disbursement of approved coffee
advances under these Regulations.
(2) The Administrator shall inform—
(a) the applicant; and
(b) the registered coffee co-operative society, of approved coffee advances of
successful applicants under them within fourteen days from the date of approval.
(3) The Board shall disburse the approved funds directly to the bank account of the
successful applicant using the details provided by the applicant in application form.
Recovery of administration costs.
15. (1) Any coffee advance shall attract an administration cost of three per centum of each
amount advanced.
(2) The administration cost shall be met by the applicant and be deducted from the coffee
advance.
Recovery mechanism.
16. (1) The Board shall develop procedures for recovery of coffee advances.
(2) The Board may appoint agents for purposes of recovery of the coffee advances in
accordance with the procedures developed under sub-regulation (1).
(3) The coffee advance shall be a first charge on the applicant’s sale proceeds for coffee.
(4) The applicant may repay the coffee advance through alternative sources of income in
accordance with the procedures developed under sub-regulation (1).
(5) Notwithstanding sub-regulation (4), the coffee advance shall be recovered after the
sale of coffee.
PART V – FINANCIAL PROVISION
Bank accounts for the Fund.
17. (1) The Administrator shall cause accounts in the name of the Fund to be maintained
for the Fund in a bank within the Republic of Kenya in line with the Act and any Regulations
made thereunder.
(2) All moneys payable into the Fund shall be received into the bank accounts of the Fund.
(3) The Fund’s bank accounts shall be operated by the Administrator and two other
persons nominated by the Administrator, and approved by the Board.
Overdrawn accounts.
18. The Administrator shall ensure that no bank account of the Fund is overdrawn.

-- 303 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 305
[Subsidiary]
Expenditure of the Fund.
19. (1) The Board shall ensure that in any financial year expenditure from the Fund shall
not exceed the annual income of the Fund together with any surplus income brought forward
from a previous year.
(2) The records of expenditure relating to the Fund shall be kept and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and Regulations made thereunder.
Withdrawals from the Fund.
20. Withdrawals from the Fund shall only be for purposes of promoting the objects and
purpose for which the Fund is established and in accordance with the approved estimates of
revenue and expenditure.
Financial and procurement Regulations.
21. The Fund shall be governed by all relevant financial and procurement laws and
regulations as applicable.
Investments of the Fund.
22. (1) The Board may with the consent of the Cabinet Secretary invest any of its surplus
funds in Government securities.
(2) The income derived from the investment of surplus funds under sub-regulation (1)
shall be a source of the Fund.
Annual estimates.
23. (1) At least six months before the commencement of each financial year, the Board
shall cause to be prepared estimates of the revenue and expenditure of the Fund for that year.
(2) The annual estimates shall make provision for all estimated revenues into and
expenditures from the Fund for the financial year and in particular, the estimates shall provide
for—
(a) revenues projected to be received by the Fund from the sources of funds provided
for under these Regulations;
(b) coffee advances;
(c) monies for the administration expenses of the Fund; and
(d) the payment of the allowances of the Board in respect to oversight of the Fund.
Miscellaneous disclosures.
24. The Administrator shall publish and publicize all reports of the Fund approved by the
Board in accordance with the Act.
Quarterly reports.
25. (1) The Administrator shall prepare quarterly financial and non-financial reports in
accordance with the format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board and
the Act and submit them to the Board for approval.
(2) Upon approval, under sub-regulation (1), the Administrator shall submit the report
to the National Treasury.
Accounts of the Fund.
26. (1) The Board shall cause to be kept all proper books and records of account of the
income, expenditure, assets, equipment and properties of the Fund.

-- 304 of 625 --

306 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) Within a period of three months from the end of each financial year, the Administrator
shall submit to the Auditor-General with a copy to the National Treasury, Commission on
Revenue Allocation and Controller of Budget the financial and non-financial statements of
the Fund in accordance with the format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards
Board and the Act.
Audit of accounts.
27. The accounts submitted under regulation 26 shall be audited by the Auditor General
in accordance with the Constitution, the Act and the Public Audit Act.
Annual performance report.
28. The Board shall prepare annual performance report and submit to the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for matters relating to Co-operatives.
PART VI – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Winding up of the Fund.
29. (1) The winding up of the Fund shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Act
and the Regulations made on winding up of the Fund.
(2) The Administrator shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into the National
Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from the funds of the national
government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the National Assembly.
(4) Assets other than cash of the Fund shall be transferred to the accounting officer
responsible for matters relating to co-operatives.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to National Assembly
and to the Auditor-General for audit within six months from the date of the decision to wind
up the Fund.
Offences and penalties.
30. (1) A person who fails to give information or gives inaccurate or misleading
information or falsifies information or misrepresents information required under these
Regulations commits an offence and shall upon conviction be liable to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding ten million Kenya shillings, or to both.
(2) A person who misappropriates any funds or assets of the Fund, or assists or causes any
person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided in these
Regulations, commits an offence and shall, upon conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding ten million shillings, or to both.
Guidelines.
31. Pursuant to section 12(2)(k) of the Act, the Cabinet Secretary may issue guidelines for
the better administration of the Fund.
Revocation of LN 201 of 2019.
32. The Public Finance Management (Coffee Cherry Advance Revolving Fund) Regulations
(L.N. 201/2019) are revoked.

-- 305 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 307
[Subsidiary]
SCHEDULE
FORMS
APPLICATION FORM FOR COFFEE ADVANCE
Form 1A
[Regulation 10(1)(a)).]
APPLICATION FORM FOR COFFEE ADVANCE
BY A MEMBER OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY

-- 306 of 625 --

308 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]

-- 307 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 309
[Subsidiary]

-- 308 of 625 --

310 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]

-- 309 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 311
[Subsidiary]

-- 310 of 625 --

312 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (STRATEGIC FOOD
RESERVE TRUST FUND) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Revocation of LN No 15 of 2015 and LN No 145.

-- 311 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 313
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (STRATEGIC FOOD
RESERVE TRUST FUND) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 61/2020]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Strategic Food
Reserve Trust Fund Fund) (Revocation) Regulations.
Revocation of LN No 15 of 2015 and LN No 145.
2. The Public Finance Management (Strategic Food Reserve Trust Fund) Regulations (L.N.
No 15/2015) are revoked.

-- 312 of 625 --

314 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL
DROUGHT EMERGENCY FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Capital of the Fund.
5. Sources of the Fund.
6. Object and purpose of the Fund.
7. Expenditure of the Fund.
8. Oversight role of the Board.
9. Functions of the Board.
10. Administrator of the Fund.
11. Designation of administrator of the Fund.
12. Vacancy in the office of the administrator of the Fund.
13. Removal of the administrator of the Fund.
14. Secretariat of the Fund.
15. Functions of the secretariat.
16. Coordination mechanism.
17. Establishment of the National Steering Committee.
18. Establishment of the Intergovernmental Technical Committee.
19. Establishment of the County Drought Committee.
20. Resource mobilization.
21. Standard setting and norms.
PART III – PROJECTS
22. Intervention areas.
23. Emergencies not handled by the Fund.
24. Drought recovery.
25. Criteria for accessing drought resilience and preparedness component funds.
26. Project planning.
27. Projects designed by the Fund, county governments or national government
entities.
28. Projects financed jointly with faith based organization or non-governmental
organization or community based organization.
29. Joint infrastructure projects by counties.
30. Drought response.
31. Rules to access drought response funds.
32. Submission of project proposals.
PART IV – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
33. Allocation of resources among drought risk management components.
34. Procedures of disbursement and accountability.

-- 313 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 315
[Subsidiary]
35. Quarterly reports on projects and disbursements.
36. Fund bank accounts.
37. Record of disbursements to be kept.
38. Financial reporting.
39. Management reports.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
40. Application of Government Financial Regulations and procedures.
41. Costs of running the Fund.
42. Offence and penalty.
43. Guidelines on the Fund.
44. Winding-up of the Fund.

-- 314 of 625 --

316 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL
DROUGHT EMERGENCY FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 27/2021]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (National Drought
Emergency Fund) Regulations, 2021.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires —
"Act" means the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"accounting officer" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Board" means the Board of the National Drought Management Authority constituted
under section 8 of the National Drought Management Authority Act (Cap. 388);
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to
finance;
"County Drought Committee" means the County Committee on Drought and Food Security
constituted under regulation 19;
"disaster" means disruption of the functioning of a community or society causing
widespread human, material, economic or environmental loses which exceed the ability of
the affected community or society to cope using its own resources;
"drought" means a predictable and slow-onset disruption of the functioning of a
community or society caused by periods of lower-than-normal precipitation;
"drought contingency plan" means a management process that analysis emerging drought
risks and establishes arrangements in advance to enable timely, effective and appropriate
preparedness and responses;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the thirtieth day of June in
each year;
"financing agreement" means any document signed by the Government of Kenya and any
development partner or such other person, which provides for grant or other financing to the
Fund;
"Fund" means the National Drought Emergency Fund established under regulation 3;
"Inter-governmental Technical Committee" means the Intergovernmental Technical
Committee on Drought and Food Security established under regulation 18;
"National Steering Committee" means the National Drought and Food Security Steering
Committee established under regulation 17;
"officer administering the Fund" means an officer designated as the administrator of the
fund under regulation 10;
"Secretary" means the Secretary of the National Drought Management Authority
appointed under section 12 of the National Drought Management Authority Act (Cap. 388).

-- 315 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 317
[Subsidiary]
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the National Drought Emergency Fund
which shall be administered by the officer designated under regulation 10.
Capital of the Fund.
4. (1) The initial capital of the Fund shall be two billion shillings appropriated by
Parliament.
(2) The Fund shall be financed through the annual appropriations by the National
Assembly which appropriations may include contributions from the private sector, donor
support and global climate change and disaster risk financing facilities.
(3) All receipts, savings and accruals to the Fund and the balances thereof at the end of
each financial year shall be retained by the Fund.
Sources of the Fund.
5. The sources of the Fund shall consist of—
(a) such monies as may be appropriated by the National Assembly;
(b) grants and donations;
(c) global climate change and disaster risk financing facilities;
(d) income generated from the proceeds of the Fund; and
(e) any monies accruing to or received by the Fund from any other lawful source.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
6. The object and purpose for which the Fund is established is to —
(a) improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the drought risk management system
in the country;
(b) facilitate resilience building, preparedness and timely response to drought during
its different stages in order to reduce and minimise the negative effects of
droughts;
(c) to receive financial resources from development partners who support government
on drought risk management interventions;
(d) provide for —
(i) a common basket emergency fund in order to facilitate faster, transparent,
predictable and accountable release of Funds for drought risk management;
(ii) funds for capacity and technical expertise development to improve on
drought risk management systems; and
(iii) the establishment, management and coordination of programmes, projects
or activities to further the foregoing objects and purposes.
Expenditure of the Fund.
7. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
pursuant to the object and purpose for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
work programmes, contingency plans and cost estimates which shall be prepared by the
administrator of the Fund and approved by the Board before the beginning of the financial
year to which they relate.

-- 316 of 625 --

318 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Any revision of the approved annual work programme, contingency plans and of any
cost estimates shall be referred to the Board for approval.
(4) The expenditure of this Fund shall be based on projects and programmes approved
by the Board.
(5) The Fund shall not be used for the purpose of supporting political parties or entities.
Oversight role of the Board.
8. The Board of the National Drought Management Authority established under section
18(1) of the National Drought Management Authority Act (Cap. 388) shall oversee the
administration and management of the Fund.
Functions of the Board.
9. (1) The functions of the Board relating to the oversight role and administration of the
Fund shall be to —
(a) formulate policies to achieve the objects and purpose of the Fund;
(b) provide oversight on the administration and management of the Fund;
(c) approve estimates of revenue and expenditure of the Fund for each financial year;
(d) receive, review and approve statutory and management reports of the Fund before
submission to third parties;
(e) approve the opening of any bank account of the Fund;
(f) oversee timely and efficient disbursement of funds from the Fund to finance
approved projects and programmes or interventions by the Fund; and
(g) perform such other duties as may be considered necessary by the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for matters relating to drought from time to time, for the proper
administration and management of the Fund and such a duty shall be assigned in
writing.
(2) The Board shall conduct its business and affairs in the manner provided under section
11 of the National Drought Management Authority Act (Cap. 388).
Administrator of the Fund.
10. (1) The Secretary of the National Drought Management Authority Board shall be the
administrator of the Fund.
(2) Despite paragraph (1), in the absence of the Secretary, the Cabinet Secretary may
designate a person who has satisfied the criteria set out under regulation 11 and upon
recommendation by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to drought in
consultation with the Board as the administrator of the Fund and shall be a member of the
Board.
(3) The administrator of the Fund shall —
(a) open and operate a bank account at the Central Bank of Kenya or a bank to be
approved by the Board and the National Treasury;
(b) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(c) consult with the Board and the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating
to drought on matters relating to the administration of the Fund;
(d) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records of all
activities and undertakings financed from the Fund;

-- 317 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 319
[Subsidiary]
(e) prepare, sign and submit to the Board in respect of each financial year and within
three months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to the Fund
for approval;
(f) transmit to the Auditor-General the statement of accounts under paragraph (e),
with a copy to the National Treasury and such a statement shall be prepared in the
manner prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board and audited
in accordance with the Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B);
(g) furnish additional information which is proper and sufficient for the purpose of
examination and audit by the Auditor General in accordance with the provisions of
the Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B); and
(h) prepare a quarterly report on the receipts into and issues out of the Fund and
submit it to the Cabinet Secretary for gazettement by the 21st of every fourth
month.
(4) Every statement of account shall include details of the balance between the assets and
liabilities of the Fund, and shall indicate the financial status of the Fund as at the end of the
financial year concerned.
Designation of administrator of the Fund.
11. (1) Where the Cabinet Secretary designates a person as the administrator of the Fund
under regulation 10 (2), that person shall be designated as provided under this regulation.
(2) A person shall be designated as the administrator of the Fund under this regulation
if that person —
(a) holds a degree from a university recognized in Kenya;
(b) has at least ten years' post-qualification experience;
(c) has at least five years' experience in the relevant field; and
(d) satisfies the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) A person designated as the administrator of the Fund under this regulation, shall serve
for a term of three years, renewable once.
(4) Where the Cabinet Secretary does not intend to designate the administrator of the
Fund after the first term, the Cabinet Secretary shall notify the administrator of the Fund of
such a decision at least three months before the expiry of the incumbent's term.
(5) The administrator of the Fund shall only be subject to the directions of the Board and
shall be responsible for the day to day administration of the affairs of the Fund including the
staff of the secretariat of the Fund.
Vacancy in the office of the administrator of the Fund.
12. The office of the administrator of the Fund shall become vacant if the holder—
(a) dies;
(b) by notice in writing addressed to the Board resigns from office;
(c) is convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term of more than
six months without the option of a fine;
(d) is absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board without good cause; or
(e) is removed in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

-- 318 of 625 --

320 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Removal of the administrator of the Fund.
13. (1) The administrator of the Fund may be removed from office by the Board only on
grounds of—
(a) inability to perform the functions of the office arising out of physical or mental
incapacity;
(b) gross misconduct;
(c) bankruptcy; or
(d) incompetence.
(2) Prior to removal under paragraph (1), the administrator of the Fund shall be—
(a) informed, in writing, of the reasons for the intended removal; and
(b) given an opportunity to put in a defence against any such allegations either in
person or through an advocate.
Secretariat of the Fund.
14. (1) The secretariat of the National Drought Management Authority established under
section 13(1) of the National Drought Management Authority Act (Cap. 388) shall be the
secretariat of the Fund.
(2) Subject to paragraph (1), the Board may designate the staff of the National Drought
Management Authority to be the secretariat of the Fund or recruit staff of the Fund as are
necessary for the proper discharge of the functions of the Fund.
(3) Where, the Board recruits staff under paragraph (2), the Board shall ensure that in the
appointment of the staff—
(a) is done competitively subject to the provisions of Article 234(5) of the Constitution;
(b) not more than two-thirds of the staff shall be of the same gender;
(c) the regional and other diversity of the people of Kenya is taken into account; and
(d) persons with disabilities are afforded adequate and equal opportunities.
(4) For the avoidance of doubt, the Secretariat of the Fund shall also comprise of the
administrator of the Fund.
Functions of the secretariat.
15. (1) The secretariat shall—
(a) be responsible for the day to day administration and management of the Fund;
(b) develop a transparent and accountable financial internal control systems for the
Fund;
(c) prepare and submit for approval by the Board estimates of revenue and
expenditure, annual work programmes and costs estimates, annual procurement
plans and annual cash flow plans;
(d) implement projects, programmes and coordinate with other national government
ministries, county governments and non-state actors at the national and county
level in the realization of the objectives and purpose of the Fund;
(e) prepare statutory and management reports and submit them to the Board for
approval;

-- 319 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 321
[Subsidiary]
(f) monitor and provide reports to the Board, on a quarterly basis or as need arises, on
efficiency and effectiveness of drought risk management supported by the Fund;
(g) implement the decisions of the Board;
(h) undertake any other duty as the Board may assign through a resolution.
(2) In addition to the functions assigned under paragraph (1), the secretariat shall—
(a) receive investment and contingency plans for review and recommendation to the
Board for approval;
(b) receive and review drought early warning information for early action;
(c) propose to the Board the triggers for the funds flow to the various drought stages
to be financed from the Fund;
(d) propose to the Board the triggers for response plans for the activation of the
response plans;
(e) oversee projects and programmes implemented through financing of the Fund;
(f) with the approval of the Board, establish prudent public financial management
systems for the administration of the Fund;
(g) coordinate monitoring and evaluation of projects financed from the Fund;
(h) prepare regular communication messages regarding drought risk management
with regard to the Fund; and
(i) maintain proper records of the Fund.
Coordination mechanism.
16. The coordination mechanism for the Fund shall be through—
(a) the National Drought and Food Security Steering Committee established under
regulation 17;
(b) the Inter-Governmental Technical Committee on Drought and Food Security
established under regulation 18; and
(c) the County Committee on Drought and Food Security established under regulation
19;
(d) development partner engagement forums as may be determined by the Cabinet
Secretary from time to time.
Establishment of the National Steering Committee.
17. (1) There is established the National Drought and Food Security Steering Committee
comprised of—
(a) the Deputy President who shall be the chairperson;

-- 320 of 625 --

322 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) the cabinet secretaries responsible for—
(i) drought risk management;
(ii) devolution;
(iii) planning;
(iv) finance;
(v) water;
(vi) health;
(vii) education;
(viii) defence;
(ix) national government coordination;
(x) agriculture, livestock and fisheries;
(xi) social protection;
(xii) environment;
(xiii) energy;
(xiv) wildlife; and
(xv) meteorology;
(c) the chairperson, Council of Governors.
(2) The Chairperson, Council of Governors shall be the Vice-Chair of the National Steering
Committee.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to drought risk management
shall be the Secretary of the Steering Committee.
(4) The functions of the National Steering Committee shall be to—
(a) provide policy recommendations on drought response interventions;
(b) provide leadership and oversight on drought and food security interventions during
the alarm and emergency stages;
(c) receive, consider and make decisions based on reports from the Inter-governmental
Technical Committee; and
(d) mobilize resources for drought response interventions during alarm and
emergency stages.
(5) The National Drought and Food Security Steering Committee shall report to the
Cabinet.
(6) The quorum at the meeting of the National Steering Committee shall be one-third
of the members of the Committee, and decisions at a meeting of the Committee shall be by
consensus.
(7) The Secretariat of the Fund shall keep proper records of the meetings of the National
Steering Committee.
(8) The decisions of the National Steering Committee shall be communicated to the
members of the Committee and relevant government agencies within fourteen days after the
meeting.

-- 321 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 323
[Subsidiary]
Establishment of the Intergovernmental Technical Committee.
18. (1) There is established the Inter-Governmental Technical Committee on Drought
and Food Security comprised of—
(a) the principal secretaries responsible for—
(i) drought risk management;
(ii) devolution;
(iii) planning;
(iv) finance;
(v) water;
(vi) health;
(vii) education;
(viii) defence;
(ix) national government coordination;
(x) agriculture and livestock;
(xi) social protection;
(xii) environment;
(xiii) energy;
(xiv) wildlife; and
(xv) meteorology;
(b) five nominees of the Council of Governors, who shall be county executive
committee members responsible for matters relating to drought, water, health,
agriculture and finance.
(2) In making the nominations under paragraph (1)(b), the Council of Governors shall
consider representation from drought prone areas.
(3) The Inter-governmental Technical Committee shall be chaired by the Principal
Secretary for matters relating to drought risk management.
(4) The quorum at the meeting of the Intergovernmental Technical Committee shall be
one-third of the members of the Committee, and decisions at a meeting of the Committee
shall be by consensus.
(5) The administrator of the Fund shall be the Secretary of the Inter-governmental
Technical Committee.
(6) The functions of the Inter-governmental Technical Committee shall be to—
(a) prepare the agenda of the National Steering Committee;
(b) receive, consider and make appropriate recommendations to the national steering
committee on the optimal drought response interventions;
(c) receive, consider and identify resources available in various ministries, state
departments and agencies and county governments for drought interventions and
make appropriate recommendations;
(d) oversee the implementation of the decisions of the National Steering Committee;
(e) receive, consider and make appropriate recommendations on intervention
measures being undertaken by various government agencies, development
partners, faith based organizations and other non-governmental organizations;
and

-- 322 of 625 --

324 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(f) mobilize resources towards the fulfilment of the objective of the Fund.
(7) The secretariat of the Fund shall keep proper records of the meetings of the
Intergovernmental Technical Committee.
(8) The decisions of the Intergovernmental Technical Committee shall be communicated
to the members of the Committee and relevant government agencies within fourteen days
after the meeting.
Establishment of the County Drought Committee.
19. (1) There is established the County Committee on Drought and Food Security
comprised of—
(a) the officer responsible for coordination of national government functions at the
county level;
(b) the national government officer responsible for drought risk management at the
county level;
(c) the national government officer responsible for education at the county level;
(d) the national government officer responsible for social protection at the county
level;
(e) the county executive committee member responsible for drought risk
management;
(f) the county executive committee member responsible for planning;
(g) the county executive committee member responsible for water;
(h) the county executive committee member responsible for finance;
(i) the county executive committee member responsible for health;
(j) the county executive committee member responsible for agriculture, livestock and
fisheries;
(k) the county executive committee member responsible for early childhood
education;
(l) the county executive committee member responsible for social protection;
(m) two representatives nominated by the caucus of faith based organizations involved
in matters related to drought and food security at the county level;
(n) two representatives of non-governmental organizations and community based
organizations working on matters related to drought and food security in the
respective county; and
(o) two persons nominated by the Board to represent the marginalised areas who shall
have knowledge on drought and food security in the respective county and shall be
residents of that county.
(2) The officers specified under paragraphs (1)(b) to (l) may in writing nominate a
representative to attend and participate in the meetings of the County Drought Committee
on their behalf.
(3) The County Drought Committee shall be co-chaired by the Governor and the County
Commissioner.
(4) The Secretariat of the Fund shall be the Secretariat to the County Drought Committee.

-- 323 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 325
[Subsidiary]
(5) The functions of the County Drought Committee shall be to—
(a) consider drought and food security early warning information and make
recommendation to the Board;
(b) coordinate drought risk management plans and ensure their integration into the
national and county planning and budgeting processes;
(c) consider and recommend to the Board for approval projects to be financed by the
Fund under the investments in resilience building and drought preparedness;
(d) consider and recommend to the Board, for approval, drought response plans and
appropriate interventions;
(e) ensure projects recommended for funding under paragraph (c) and (d) are not
duplicated;
(f) coordinate and communicate drought interventions measures and share drought
risk management information with the public;
(g) provide recommendations to the Board to inform policy formulation and strategy
of the Fund;
(h) oversee the monitoring and evaluation of projects and programmes funded under
the Fund;
(i) oversee drought and food security interventions;
(j) coordinate actors on drought risk management at the county level;
(k) implement decisions of the National Steering Committee and the Inter-
governmental Technical Committee;
(l) consider and make recommendations on the level of government that should
intervene on drought and food security matters;
(m) co-ordinate resource mobilization at the county level.
(6) The quorum at the meeting of the County Drought Committee shall be one-third of
the members of the Committee, and decisions at a meeting of the Committee shall be by
consensus.
(7) The County Drought Committee may co-opt upto a maximum of three experts in order
to facilitate the Committee in making an informed decision.
(8) A person appointed under paragraph (1)(m), (n) and (o) shall cease to be a member of
the County Drought Committee —
(a) if the person resigns from office;
(b) dies;
(c) is absent from three consecutive meetings of the Committee without permission
from the chairperson;
(d) is convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term of more than
six months without the option of a fine;

-- 324 of 625 --

326 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(e) is removed from office by the vote of at least two thirds of the members of the
Committee on any one or more of the following grounds —
(i) lack of integrity;
(ii) gross misconduct;
(iii) embezzlement of public funds;
(iv) physical or mental infirmity.
(9) Whenever a vacancy occurs in the County Drought Committee by reason of resignation,
incapacitation or death of a member appointed pursuant to paragraph (1)(m) (n) and (o), then
the vacancy shall be filled from the same category of persons where the vacancy has occurred.
(10) Members of the County Drought Committee shall be appointed by notice in the
Gazette by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to drought risk management.
(11) A member of the County Drought Committee appointed under paragraph 1(m) (n) and
(o), other than ex-officio member, shall hold office for a term of three years renewable once.
(12) The Secretariat of the Fund shall keep proper records of the meetings of the County
Drought Committee.
(13) The decisions of the County Drought Committee shall be communicated to the
members of the Committee and relevant government agencies within fourteen days after the
meeting.
(14) The secretariat shall prepare and submit reports on the activities of the County
Drought Committee to the Board with a copy to the county executive committee responsible
for matters relating to drought risk management.
(15) The Secretariat of the Fund shall keep proper records of the meetings of the County
Drought Committee, which records shall be shared within fourteen days after confirmation
with the county committee members with a copy to the Board.
Resource mobilization.
20. (1) The Committees established under regulations 17, 18 and 19 and the Board shall
mobilize resources through—
(a) engagement with the communities, development partners and private sector;
(b) engagement with the global disaster risk and climate change funds or entities that
finance drought risk management programmes;
(c) development of bankable proposals for drought early warning, preparedness and
resilience.
(2) Any engagement with the development partners, private sector or global funds shall
be done within the framework specified by the Cabinet Secretary and shall be in line with the
Kenya external resources mobilization policy.
Standard setting and norms.
21. (1) The National Government shall be responsible for policy formulation, setting
norms and standards for drought risk management through public participation.
(2) The secretariat of the Fund shall consolidate various policies, norms and standards
and disseminate them to national government agencies, counties and development partners
to facilitate their implementation.
(3) County governments shall prepare their drought risk management plans and reports
based on national policies, norms and standards set by the National Government including
Guidelines which may be issued from time to time.

-- 325 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 327
[Subsidiary]
(4) The national norms and standards shall set sector specific quantifiable indicators for
the outputs for each strategic objective, which shall form the basis of reporting on drought
and food security for both national and county governments.
PART III – PROJECTS
Intervention areas.
22. The Fund may finance interventions in the following areas to complement existing
government programmes, in accordance with the Guidelines under these Regulations —
(a) water and sanitation;
(b) agriculture, livestock and fisheries;
(c) education;
(d) health, sanitation and nutrition;
(e) cash transfers scale ups;
(f) conflict management and resolution; and
(g) drought coordination.
Emergencies not handled by the Fund.
23. The Fund shall not finance hazards which may include floods, epidemics, wild fires,
terrorism and armed conflict.
Drought recovery.
24. (1) The Secretariat of the Fund may, from time to time, request the Board to approve
drought recovery interventions.
(2) Where the Board has approved drought recovery interventions to be undertaken by the
Secretariat, the Secretariat shall prepare and submit monthly progress reports to the Board.
Criteria for accessing drought resilience and preparedness component funds.
25. (1) The criteria for prioritising access to drought resilience and preparedness
component funds shall be as follows—
(a) the projects shall be either aligned to national development priorities or be
included in the county integrated development plan;
(b) projects contributing significantly to sustainable development to enhance
resilience of communities against drought and climate change risks;
(c) evidence of community participation in drought risk reduction project
identification;
(d) projects sustainability framework after completion;
(e) satisfy all statutory requirements relating to design and implementation of such
projects;
(f) proof that a county government shall contribute a per centum agreed under
regulation 27 on co-financed projects;
(g) proof that a faith based organization, non-governmental organization or
community based organization shall contribute a per centum agreed under
regulation 28 on co- financed projects; and
(h) is supported by a recommendation of the County Drought Committee or the
Secretariat of the Fund.

-- 326 of 625 --

328 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The Secretariat shall submit to the Board for approval the scores of the projects
evaluated against the criteria set out under paragraph (1).
Project planning.
26. (1) The secretariat of the Fund shall—
(a) coordinate the development of community drought risk reduction plans;
(b) receive, review and prioritise project proposals from the communities which are
aligned to national development goals or county integrated development plan;
(c) initiate project proposals to address drought and food insecurity and submit the
proposals to the Board for approval;
(d) prepare and submit prioritised projects to the County Drought Committees for
review and make recommendations to the Board;
(e) monitor implementation of approved projects and submit quarterly reports to the
County Drought Committee and the Board.
(f) evaluate and document approved completed projects and submit reports to the
County Drought Committee and the Board.
(2) Any project proposals to be implemented by the Fund shall be approved by the Board
prior to implementation.
(3) The project proposals under this regulation shall relate to resilience and preparedness
stages of drought risk management.
Projects designed by the Fund, county governments or national government entities.
27. (1) A project relating to a devolved function may be designed by the secretariat of the
Fund or a county government or a national government agency.
(2) The project designed under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the Board, a county
government or a national government agency for consideration and financing.
(3) Where the secretariat of the Fund has designed a project relating to a devolved
function, the secretariat may engage a county government for co-financing.
(4) Where a project has been designed under paragraph (3), the county government shall
contribute a per centum to be agreed between the county government and the Board in form
of a matching grant, from time to time.
(5) Where a county government has accepted to co-finance a project under paragraph (4)
that county government shall signify in writing to the administrator of the Fund not later than
31st January of each year.
(6) Where projects are financed under this regulation, the Secretariat of the Fund shall
use that project to build the capacity of that county on drought risk management.
(7) The secretariat of the Fund shall enter into an inter-governmental agreement pursuant
to Article 187 of the Constitution and the Intergovernmental Relations Act (Cap. 265F) with
the respective county government for any project financed under this Regulation.
Projects financed jointly with faith based organization or non-governmental organization or
community based organization.
28. (1) The secretariat of the Fund in collaboration with a county government may
design a project relating to a devolved function and submit it to a faith based organization
or non-governmental organization or community based organization for consideration and
co-financing.

-- 327 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 329
[Subsidiary]
(2) Where a project is co-financed by a faith based organization or non-governmental
organization or community based organization, such an institution shall contribute a per
centum to be agreed between the organization and the Board.
(3) The Secretariat of the Fund shall enter into an inter- governmental agreement
pursuant to Article 187 of the Constitution and the Intergovernmental Relations Act (Cap.
265F) with the respective county government for any project financed under this Regulation.
(4) The Secretariat of the Fund shall carry out joint monitoring and evaluation with a faith
based organization or non-governmental organization or community based organization, as
agreed between the parties in the memorandum of understanding for any project financed
under this regulation.
Joint infrastructure projects by counties.
29. (1) Pursuant to section 146 of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A), the
Secretariat of the Fund may in collaboration with the respective county governments, prepare
a project design relating to a devolved function as a joint infrastructure project to be financed
by more than one county or a joint infrastructure project between one county and the Fund.
(2) Any projects designed under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the Board for approval
and after approval it shall be submitted to the respective county executive committee member
responsible for matters relating to drought risk management for co-financing, with a copy to
the County Governor.
(3) The Secretariat of the Fund shall coordinate meetings among the counties undertaking
the joint infrastructure project.
(4) The Board shall enter into an inter-governmental agreement pursuant to Article 187
of the Constitution and the Intergovernmental Relations Act (Cap. 265F) with the respective
county governments for any project financed under this Regulation.
Drought response.
30. (1) The Secretariat of the Fund shall prepare a rapid assessment report for the affected
county during alert stage or alarm stage as informed by drought early warning information
for—
(a) determining the resource requirements for alert, alarm or emergency stages of the
drought;
(b) proposing the agencies to be involved in responding to the drought and food
security interventions to be financed by the Fund;
(c) recommending the funds flow mechanism to the Board for approval which
may include flow of funds to county governments or various agencies and the
accountability framework by each agency to the Fund; or
(d) liaising with the county governments or other agencies approved by the Board to
undertake various response interventions in a timely manner.
(2) The Secretariat of the Fund shall receive sectoral reports from the relevant national
government agencies to facilitate preparation of the drought and food security reports.
(3) The Secretariat of the Fund shall prepare and submit drought and food security report
to the Inter-governmental Technical Committee—
(a) on a monthly basis and before the tenth day of the succeeding month during the
alert stage; and Joint infrastructure projects by counties.
(b) every fourteen days during the alarm and emergency stages, on receipt of the early
warning information of the drought and food security.

-- 328 of 625 --

330 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(4) Where drought and food security response interventions require financial resources
beyond the capital of this Fund, the Board shall submit a proposal to the National Steering
Committee on the financing gap and a request to mobilise more resources to respond to
drought and food insecurity.
Rules to access drought response funds.
31. To access drought response funds the Board shall consider the —
(a) alert stage of drought cycle as per the Authority's drought phase classifications
guided by vegetation condition index and other social economic indicators;
(b) request received from County Drought Committees or the Secretariat of the Fund
on drought response plans;
(c) evidence of drought rapid assessment by the affected sectors based on early
warning trigger indicators;
(d) response plan based on drought rapid assessment reports and other drought risk
secondary data;
(e) recommendation by the county or national coordination structure;
(f) procurement plans based on drought and food security response intervention
measures; and
(g) cash flow plans supporting the procurements plans on drought and food security
response intervention measures.
Submission of project proposals.
32. (1) A community may at any time submit project proposals through the county
government, national government agency, community based organization or faith based
organization, to the Secretariat of the Fund.
(2) Project proposals received by the Secretariat of the Fund by thirtieth November of
each year shall be reviewed and appropriate recommendations made by the County Drought
Committee to the Board for financing from the Fund.
(3) Any project approved for financing by the Board, which has a co-financing arrangement
shall be communicated to the relevant county government or agency co-financing that project
by the thirtieth day of January each year for incorporation in their respective budgets.
(4) Any project submitted for approval under this regulation shall be identified through
a drought risk management participatory process.
(5) The Secretariat of the Fund shall publish and publicise the list of approved projects
by the Board for each financial year.
PART IV – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Allocation of resources among drought risk management components.
33. (1) The resources of the Fund shall be allocated to the various drought risk
management components as follows—
(a) resilience and preparedness shall be allocated up to fifty per centum (50%) of the
total budget of the Fund in each financial year;
(b) response interventions shall be allocated up to forty per centum (40%) of the total
budget of the Fund in each financial year; and
(c) recovery interventions shall be allocated up to five per centum (5%) of the total
budget to be funded every financial year.

-- 329 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 331
[Subsidiary]
(2) Where no recovery interventions are required under paragraph (1)(c), the amount
of money thereof may be allocated to either resilience and preparedness or response
interventions.
(3) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), at least twenty five per cent (25%) of the total
Government of Kenya funds allocated to response are earmarked for cash transfers through
the National Safety Net Programme.
(4) Despite paragraph (1), the National Steering Committee may increase the proportion
of the Fund allocated to drought response.
(5) Despite paragraphs (1), (2), (3) and (4), a grant or donation to the Fund may be
earmarked for the purpose agreed between the government and the development partner in
line with the objectives of the Fund.
Procedures of disbursement and accountability.
34. (1) The Board shall, from time to time, formulate guidelines for disbursements of
funds.
(2) Where the Board intends to use the county governments or faith based organizations,
non-governmental organizations or community based organizations, it shall ensure that the
guidelines for disbursement of funds to the county government or institution have clear roles
and responsibilities for reporting and accounting of the resources disbursed to the county
governments or the institution.
Quarterly reports on projects and disbursements.
35. (1) The Board shall, on a quarterly basis, submit a report to the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for matters relating to drought affairs with a copy to the National Treasury and
the National Steering Committee, detailing —
(a) a summary of the project proposals approved by the Board in the preceding quarter
as recommended by the County Drought Committee or the Secretariat of the Fund
and indicating the funding status of such projects, if any;
(b) a summary of the status of disbursements from the Fund to the respective county
governments or any agency involved in implementation of any projects financed
from the Fund;
(c) a summary of the status of disbursements of funds to the various projects and
implementation progress;
(d) a summary of outputs and outcomes of each project, where applicable; and
(e) any restriction imposed on a county government or any agency involved in the
implementation of the projects of the Fund.
(2) The Board shall prepare and submit quarterly monitoring and evaluation reports to
the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to drought affairs in line with the
guidelines issued by the Board from time to time.
Fund bank accounts.
36. (1) All bank accounts of the Fund shall be opened in accordance with the provisions
of section 28 of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A) and the Regulations thereof.
(2) Any bank account of the Fund shall be opened upon approval of the Board and the
National Treasury and shall be in the name of the Fund and the name of the county to which
it relates.
(3) The main Fund bank account shall be opened and maintained at the Central Bank of
Kenya.

-- 330 of 625 --

332 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(4) The signatories to the main Fund account under paragraph (3) shall be the
administrator of the Fund and at least two other persons authorized by the Board from
amongst the staff of the Secretariat of the Fund.
(5) The signing instructions shall be such that the signature of the administrator of the
Fund shall be mandatory on all payment cheques or electronic instructions intended for actual
release of money from the main Fund account, plus any one of the other two Fund account
signatories.
(6) The signatories of any other bank accounts shall be at least two, one of whom shall be
mandatory and all the signatories shall be approved by the Board.
(7) The signing instructions of any other bank account of the Fund under paragraph (6)
shall be such that the signature of the technical officer designated by the administrator of
the Fund, shall be mandatory on all payment cheques or electronic instructions intended for
actual release of money from that account, plus any one of the other bank account signatories
of that account designated as such.
(8) Every payment or instruction for payment out of the respective bank account shall be
fully supported in line with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A)
and the Regulations thereof.
Record of disbursements to be kept.
37. (1) An accurate record of all disbursements from the Fund Account for financing
approved projects shall be kept and updated every month by the Secretariat of the Fund.
(2) The administrator of the Fund shall submit to the Board, quarterly and annual reports
on all projects approved and financed from the Fund.
Financial reporting.
38. (1) The Board shall prepare financial and non-financial reports in accordance with
the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A) and as may be prescribed
from time to time by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
(2) The Board shall prepare an annual general performance report of the Fund to be
submitted together with the report under paragraph (1).
(3) The annual financial and non-financial statements prepared under paragraph (1) shall
be submitted to the Auditor-General for audit in accordance with the Public Audit Act (Cap.
412B).
Management reports.
39. (1) The Board shall prepare a management report on a monthly basis, which report
shall contain details on—
(a) the severity of the drought prevailing in the country and by county;
(b) the status report on drought interventions measures undertaken during the
preceding month and the cumulative drought period;
(c) status report on county drought and food security intervention measures
undertaken during the preceding month and the cumulative drought period;
(d) the resources required for drought risk management under each of the following
stages—
(i) resilience and preparedness stage, if any;
(ii) response stage; or
(iii) recovery stage.

-- 331 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 333
[Subsidiary]
(2) The report prepared under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the Cabinet Secretary
for matters relating to drought risk management with a copy to the National Steering
Committee and the Chairperson Council of Governors, with clear recommendations from the
Board by the tenth day of the succeeding month.
(3) A county government experiencing drought and food insecurity shall by the fifth day
of each month submit a report to the secretariat of the Fund for review and the making of
recommendations by the County Drought Committee.
(4) The report under paragraph (3) shall contain the following details—
(a) the county drought response plan;
(b) interventions made by the county to mitigate against drought impacts;
(c) interventions made in partnership with a county government against drought
impacts by development partners;
(d) resources available by the county government and development partners
partnering with the county government to finance the response plan; and
(e) financing gap per sector, if any.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Application of Government Financial Regulations and procedures.
40. Subject to the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A), any
existing relevant legislation and existing Government Financial Regulations and Procedures
shall apply in the administration of the Fund.
Costs of running the Fund.
41. (1) The administration costs for running the Fund shall not be more than three per
centum (3%) of the total budgetary provision for the Fund.
(2) Despite the provisions under paragraph (1), each year, three (3%) per centum of the
annual budget of the Fund shall be set aside for the Fund Secretariat, of which not more than
two (2%) per centum shall be allocated to all County Secretariat's and Committees expenditure
in accordance with the set criterion by the Board.
Offence and penalty.
42. (1) Any person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists
or causes any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner
provided for in the Act and these Regulations, commits an offence and shall, upon conviction,
be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding ten
million shillings or to both.
(2) In addition to the penalty prescribed under paragraph (1) and subject to the existing
relevant laws, the Court may order for the recovery of the monies or assets acquired as a result
of the commission of the offence thereof.
Guidelines on the Fund.
43. The Board shall through participatory process and in consultation with the Cabinet
Secretary, develop guidelines for the proper management of the Fund.
Winding-up of the Fund.
44. (1) In the event of winding up of the Fund, the net cash balances shall be transferred
to the National Exchequer Account while other assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the
Ministry for the time being responsible for matters relating to drought.

-- 332 of 625 --

334 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The term of the Fund shall be for an initial period of ten (10) years, beyond which the
approval of the Cabinet and Parliament shall be sought.

-- 333 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 335
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL ROADS TOLL FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Objects and purpose of Regulations.
4. Imposition of tolls.
5. Establishment of the Fund.
6. Sources of the Fund.
7. Payments out of the Fund.
8. Establishment of Oversight Committee.
9. Qualifications for appointment.
10. Functions of the Committee.
11. Vacation and filling of office.
12. Officer Administering the Fund.
13. Functions of Officer Administering the Fund.
14. Addressing shortfalls in the Fund.
15. Determining shortfalls in Fund.
16. Fund Secretariat.
17. Eligibility of disbursements out of Fund.
18. Payment procedure by the Officer Administering the Fund.
19. Right to question and withhold payment instruction.
20. Opening of accounts, and equality of Fund liabilities.
21. Fund not to be overdrawn.
22. Procedure for prefunding the Fund.
23. Declaration and use of surplus Funds.
24. Moneys to be retained in Fund.
25. Administrative costs.
26. Superintendence of Fund expenditure.
27. Access to information.
28. Government financial Regulations.
29. Submission of annual performance reports.
30. Misconduct of public officers.
31. Review of performance of the Fund.
32. Alternative Arrangements and Winding Up.
33. Revocation of LN 307 of 1986.

-- 334 of 625 --

336 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT
(NATIONAL ROADS TOLL FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 222/2021]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (National Roads
Toll Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Act" means the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"authorized toll collector" means a toll collector appointed as such under section 4 of the
Public Roads Toll Act (Cap. 407);
"budget framework" means the national government budget process under the Act;
"business day" means a working day and excludes weekends and public holidays;
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary responsible for finance;
"carrying capacity of the Fund" means the ability of the Fund to meet new funding
obligations being imposed as a consequence to the admission of new project roads into the
Fund’s liability portfolio, relative to obligations already existing under the Fund;
"Committee" means the Oversight Committee established under regulation 8 of these
Regulations;
"contracting authority" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Private
Partnership Act(Cap. 430);
"financial year" has the meaning assigned to it under Article 260 of the Constitution;
"Fund" means the National Roads Toll Fund established under regulation 5 of these
Regulations;
"Fund Secretariat" means the Fund Secretariat established under regulation 16 of these
Regulations;
"independent expert" means a person or organisation with substantial experience in
the development of traffic forecasts, toll revenue projections and road project agreements
appointed to support the Officer Administering the Fund in the preparation of quarterly and
annual inflow and outflow projections;
"inflows" means all payments into the Fund;
"Officer Administering the Fund" means the officer designated as such under regulation
12 of these Regulations;
"outflows" means payments out of the Fund to meet eligible expenditure under the Fund;
"Public Private Partnership Project Facilitation Fund" means the Fund established under
section 68 of the Public Private Partnerships Act, 2013;
"PPP unit" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Private
Partnerships Act, 2013;
"private party" includes a service provider or a toll operator appointed as an authorised
toll collector under a project agreement to perform services related to a toll road in Kenya;
"project agreement" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Private
Partnerships Act, 2013;

-- 335 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 337
[Subsidiary]
"project company" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Private
Partnerships Act (Cap. 429);
"project road" means a road declared as toll road under section 3(1) of the Public Roads
Toll Act and for which a project agreement obligates service or other payments from the Fund;
"Projected Fund Ratio" as at a particular future date, means the ratio of the projected
future Inflows plus any moneys currently held within the accounts of the Fund divided by the
projected future Outflows of the Fund up to that future date, calculated for twelve forward
rolling months:
Provided that this ratio shall, at a minimum, be computed taking into account arrears,
amounts invoiced but not settled and not yet classified as arrears, and other amounts that will
become due over the forecast period;
"projected shortfall" means the Projected Fund Ratio which is less than 1.3 in any
projection period;
"projected surplus" means existing Projected Fund Ratio exceeding 1.3 in any projection
period and where actual cash balances, excluding projected future inflows, within the Fund
are the basis for determining the Projected Fund Ratio;
"road toll" means a user charge levied on road users in accordance with the Public Roads
Toll Act (cap. 407);
"road users" means the categories of vehicular traffic subject to pay a prescribed toll;
"service payments" means scheduled payments due to and invoiced by a private party
pursuant to a project agreement and in accordance with these Regulations;
"service provider" means a private party or project company that enters into a project
agreement with a contracting authority to provide a project road, as detailed under a project
agreement;
"Short-Term Liquid Instruments" means any marketable financial security having short-
term maturity, readily convertible into cash, including fixed income instruments such as
treasury bills, commercial paper and certificates of deposit as may from time to time be
approved in accordance with these Regulations; and
"toll operator" means a private party appointed as an authorised toll collector under
a project agreement by a contracting authority to establish, administer and operate a toll
system.
Objects and purpose of Regulations.
3. The objects and purposes of these Regulations are—
(a) to establish a centralized Fund into which all revenues collected pursuant to these
Regulations shall be paid and administered;
(b) to provide for the oversight and administration of the Fund;
(c) to prescribe the processes by which money is paid into and out of the Fund;
(d) to provide investors in and financiers of project roads, as well as the general public,
necessary information on the status of the Fund to support investment decisions;
and
(e) to make provision for purposes connected with and incidental to the foregoing
objects and purposes.

-- 336 of 625 --

338 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Imposition of tolls.
4. There shall be imposition of road tolls which shall be set in accordance with the Public
Roads Toll Act (Cap. 407).
Establishment of the Fund.
5. There is established a fund to be known as the National Roads Toll Fund, which shall
be operated under the budgeting, accounting, reporting and auditing framework of the Act.
Sources of the Fund.
6. The sources of the Fund shall consist of the following—
(a) road tolls levied on road users for access to and use of project roads;
(b) fees or charges imposed on road users accessing project roads with overloaded axles
levied in accordance with Part III of the Kenya Roads (Kenya National Highways
Authority) Regulations, 2013, section 58 of the Traffic Act (Cap. 403) and section
21 of the East African Community Vehicle Load Control Act, 2016;
(c) monies appropriated by Parliament or otherwise paid into the Fund by the
Government for the purposes of the Fund;
(d) grants and donations made to the Fund;
(e) any earnings, accruals or income generated from moneys held within the Fund;
(f) proceeds from levies on roadside developments including road side stations which
form part of the scope of works for project roads, as well as proceeds from any access
fees and advertisements along the project roads levied in accordance with Part II of
the Kenya Roads (Kenya National Highways Authority) Regulations, 2013 and any
other applicable framework as from time to time adopted in this regard;
(g) penalties arising from any breaches by a private partner under an agreement
entered into under section 4A of the Public Roads Toll Act (Cap. 407);
(h) insurance proceeds payable to a contracting authority under a project agreement
applied as reimbursement intended to make good a loss occasioned to and suffered
by a contracting authority for an action of a private party only where the loss
suffered by the contracting authority, and linked to an insured event, have been
met from the Fund; and
(i) money from any other source approved by the Cabinet Secretary.
Payments out of the Fund.
7. Payments out of the Fund shall comprise the following—
(a) payments certified by a contracting authority as being due to a service provider or a
toll operator under a project agreement and in accordance with these Regulations,
excluding—
(i) compensation for political risks as specified under a project agreement;
(ii) termination payments; and
(iii) any other large, unscheduled one-off payments arising under a project
agreement which have not been or cannot be accommodated under the
payment mechanism under a project agreement;
(b) the approved annual operating budget of the Fund; and

-- 337 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 339
[Subsidiary]
(c) any other eligible expenditure incurred in pursuance of the object and purpose for
which the Fund is established:
Provided such costs are directly linked to the underlying projects supported under the
Fund, and they are necessary and essential components of meeting the liabilities of the Fund
under Project Roads.
Establishment of Oversight Committee.
8. (1) There is established a committee to be known as the Oversight Committee which
shall consist of—
(a) the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to
finance, who shall be its chairperson;
(b) the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to roads;
(c) the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to
planning and statistics;
(d) the Attorney-General or his representative;
(e) three other persons being non-public officials drawn from technical, financial
services, social services, life sciences, consumer rights and legal professions
appointed competitively by the Cabinet Secretary; and
(f) the Officer Administering the Fund, who shall be Secretary to the Committee.
(2) The Committee may from time to time admit a representative of a contracting
authority for the time being having a project road, a representative of the PPP Unit, the
Accountant- General or any other public official it deems fit into its sittings and participate
as an ex officio member.
Qualifications for appointment.
9. A person shall be qualified to be appointed under regulation 8(1)(e) as a member of the
Committee if that person—
(a) holds a degree in the relevant field from a university recognized in Kenya;
(b) has proven fund management or other relevant professional experience;
(c) has served in a position of senior management for a period of at least 6 years;
(d) meets the requirements of Chapter six of the Constitution; and
(e) has no convictions resulting from integrity related matters or civil liabilities.
Functions of the Committee.
10. (1) The functions and powers of the Committee shall be to—
(a) review and approve the annual work programme and budget of the Fund;
(b) authorise allocations in accordance with approved budgets as prescribed under
these Regulations;
(c) approve annual reports of the Fund before submission to the Cabinet Secretary and
inform the Cabinet Secretary of the annual funding requirements of the Fund;
(d) approve the opening of bank accounts of the Fund by the Officer Administering the
Fund;
(e) make recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary on the declaration and use of
projected surpluses;

-- 338 of 625 --

340 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(f) authorise withdrawals from the Fund of projected surpluses upon approval by
the Cabinet Secretary in accordance with these Regulations and any guidelines it
approves for this purpose;
(g) approve the systems for the control and oversight of the operation of the Fund;
(h) approve the recruitment and the terms and conditions of staff of the Fund;
(i) appoint independent advisors to provide it with expert opinion on any matter
falling within its mandate that is deemed to require such expertise, and require the
Officer Administering the Fund to meet the costs, if any, attendant on such experts
or advisors;
(j) establish the Fund’s investment policies with respect to surplus cash;
(k) approve annual financial statement of accounts prepared by the Officer
Administering the Fund;
(l) oversee the performance of the Officer Administering the Fund;
(m) oversee the performance of the Fund; and
(n) perform any other function necessary to promote the objects and purpose of the
Fund and consistent with these Regulations.
(2) The Committee shall, in discharging its functions under these Regulations—
(a) take such measures and make such recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary as it
shall be necessary to guarantee, sustain and improve the governance framework for
toll road programmes with the view to promoting the long-term financial integrity
and sustainability of the Fund with respect to the purposes for which it has been
established;
(b) meet regularly, and at least once a quarter, to consider the affairs, status and
operation of the Fund; and
(c) adopt such procedures as shall be necessary to organize the conduct of its business
including the methods by which meetings shall be convened and the frequency and
quorum thereof, the keeping of records, co-option of persons with such skills as the
Committee may require to better discharge its duties under these Regulations, the
formation of any sub- committees as the business of the Committee may demand,
and for such other matters as the Committee shall deem fit and necessary to
support its operational and functional efficiency and effectiveness.
Vacation and filling of office.
11. (1) A vacancy shall arise under regulation 8(1)(e) where the member—
(a) dies;
(b) resigns from office, by notice in writing addressed to the Cabinet Secretary;
(c) is adjudged bankrupt or otherwise declared to be insolvent;
(d) abandons the business of the Fund or fails to attend three consecutive meetings of
the Committee without a valid reason; or
(e) is convicted of an offence involving dishonesty or fraud or moral turpitude and
sentenced to imprisonment.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall appoint the person to fill the vacancy in the Committee
in accordance with regulation 8(1)(e).

-- 339 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 341
[Subsidiary]
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall, within seven days of appointing a person under regulation
8(1)(e) notify such appointment by notice in the Gazette.
Officer Administering the Fund.
12. Pursuant to section 24(5) of the Act, the Cabinet Secretary shall designate a person
to be the Officer Administering the Fund.
Functions of Officer Administering the Fund.
13. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund shall control the administration of the Fund,
for which purpose it shall cause to be established proper systems for the operation of the Fund.
(2) The systems to be established under sub-regulation (1) shall include the following—
(a) financial management systems;
(b) audit control systems;
(c) documentation and records systems;
(d) human resource management systems;
(e) assets, stores and supplies; and
(f) reporting systems.
(3) The Officer Administering the Fund shall have the following key functions—
(a) the preparation of work programme and budget of the Fund, and for this purpose
shall—
(i) make preparation of the Fund’s annual budget and work plans, and submit
the same to the Committee for approval; and
(ii) address projected shortfalls in the Fund through the budget framework in
accordance with the Act and these Regulations;
(b) financial control over the administration of the Fund, which shall include the
following—
(i) opening of a bank account and any sub-accounts of the Fund in a financial
institution approved by the Cabinet Secretary;
(ii) making payments out of the Fund in accordance with these Regulations;
(iii) causing to be kept proper books of account and all records of the Fund;
(iv) specifying all forms and prepare all funding documentation required under
these Regulations; and
(v) ensuring that there are held within the Fund sufficient funds to meet the
quarterly and annual obligations of the Fund;
(c) reporting to the Committee on the operations and performance of the Fund, which
shall include—
(i) annual financial accounts and reports of the Fund in accordance with the
Act;
(ii) quarterly reports, on a rolling 12-month basis, of the projected inflows
and outflows of the Fund and of the Projected Fund Ratio, and for any
projected shortfalls or projected surpluses and make recommendations to
the Committee for their approval;
(iii) quarterly reports, on a rolling 12-month basis, on the projected inflows and
outflows of the Fund and of the Projected Fund Ratio, as well as statements
on how any projected shortfalls are intended to be addressed which reports
shall be submitted to contracting authorities and service providers, within

-- 340 of 625 --

342 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
45 business days of the end of each quarter, following approval by the
Committee;
(iv) quarterly and annual non-financial reports on the performance of the Fund
in accordance with the Act; and
(v) preparation, signature, and with the approval of the Committee,
transmission to the Auditor-General in respect of each financial year a
statement of account relating to the Fund in such form and within such
timelines as the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board established
under section 192 of the Act may from time to time specify in accordance
with the Act, a copy of which statement of account shall be filed with the
National Treasury:
Provided that—
(aa) for the purpose of paragraphs (c)(i) and (c)(ii), the Officer Administering the
Fund, in making projections for the purpose of determining surpluses or
addressing shortfalls, shall take into account such macroeconomic forward-
looking assumptions derived from recognised and reputable independent
sources for macro- economic forecasts, to the extent these are available,
such assumptions to be used both to produce traffic and revenue forecasts
as well as to forecast future service payments, and may retain advisors for
this purpose; and
(bb) the Officer Administering the Fund may recommend to the Committee, and
the Committee may issue, such guidelines on conditions to be met before
surpluses are declared and or withdrawn, taking into account the liabilities
of the Fund, as may be necessary for the better carrying out of the objects
of this regulation;
(d) implement the Fund’s investment policies with respect to declared surpluses as
established by the Committee, which shall include—
(i) recommendations on the declaration of projected surpluses and their usage
or application;
(ii) investment of surplus cash in approved Short-Term Liquid Instruments; and
(iii) raising additional resources for the Fund;
(e) human resource management within the Fund, which shall include—
(i) recommendations on the appointment of Fund Secretariat staff to the
Committee;
(ii) appointment of required, suitably qualified, independent experts or
advisors, to prepare or advise on the preparation of the traffic and toll
revenue projections supporting the estimates of inflows, and the estimates
of payments to be made under project agreements supporting the estimates
of outflows, and consult with the contracting authorities and service
providers as necessary;
(iii) meeting the costs of advisors appointed by the Committee; and
(iv) performing any other function that the Committee may, consistent with
these Regulations, delegate and require to be undertaken.
(4) Subject to the approval of the Committee, the Officer Administering the Fund may
outsource some of its functions to agents or experts and advisors it may appoint for that
purpose, which appointment shall be in writing, and time-bound.
(5) The act of outsourcing the performance of a function of the Officer Administering the
Fund to an appointed agent, expert or advisor shall not divest the Officer Administering the

-- 341 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 343
[Subsidiary]
Fund of the responsibility to ensure that the function is effectively and efficiently performed
in the public interest or on behalf of public service as set out in these Regulations.
Addressing shortfalls in the Fund.
14. For the better implementation of the obligations under regulation 13(3)(c), (d) and
(e), the Officer Administering the Fund shall—
(a) calculate the Projected Fund Ratio for each quarter of the immediate subsequent
12-month period with the view to determining whether the Fund shall realize a
Projected Shortfall or Projected Surplus for the forecast period;
(b) upon the establishment of the Fund, and for as long as toll revenues lead to the
realization of projected shortfalls in the Fund, where the Projected Fund Ratio
is less than 1.3, cause to be appropriated such budgetary allocations as shall be
adequate to cover the projected shortfall, that is, bring the Projected Fund Ratio
to at least 1.3; and
(c) make recommendations to the Committee on the carrying capacity of the Fund,
and the Committee shall advise the Cabinet Secretary on the advisability and
implications of admitting new project liabilities into the Fund.
Determining shortfalls in Fund.
15. (1) Projected shortfalls in the Fund shall be evidenced by—
(a) contracted obligations under project agreements; and
(b) quarterly estimates of inflows and outflows of the Fund prepared by the Officer
Administering the Fund, as prescribed under Regulation 13(3)(c).
(2) For purposes of sub-regulation (1), the Officer Administering the Fund shall, at the
start of the Fund, prepare and submit to the Committee for approval a detailed methodology
for the determination of the quantum of projected shortfalls, as the basis for resolution of
such projected shortfalls within the annual budget framework.
(3) The methodology referred to under sub-regulation (2) shall be subject to such periodic
reviews as the Committee shall determine, taking into account actual experiences observed
from the tolling programme.
Fund Secretariat.
16. The Officer Administering the Fund shall appoint such staff, in consultation with the
Committee, as shall be deemed necessary to constitute the Fund Secretariat for the purposes
supporting the discharge of the functions of the Officer Administering the Fund under these
Regulations.
Eligibility of disbursements out of Fund.
17. Disbursements out of the Fund shall be bound by the following broad principles—
(a) disbursements to service providers and toll operators shall be on the basis of
contracted obligations of a contracting authority under a project agreement, as
included in the approved annual budget of the Fund and shall be against proper
documentation as detailed in regulation 18; and
(b) disbursement of projected surpluses shall be subject to formal approval of the
Cabinet Secretary as detailed in these Regulations.

-- 342 of 625 --

344 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Payment procedure by the Officer Administering the Fund.
18. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund shall satisfy himself or herself, with respect
to every payment instruction received from a contracting authority—
(a) that each payment instruction is made in writing and authenticated by the
certificate of the contracting authority as to the payment amount, the nature of
services rendered or the compensation due against which the payment instruction
is submitted and the payment recipient;
(b) that the payee’s account is the same one indicated in the project agreement or
where appropriate the payee’s account pursuant to the provisions of the lender’s
direct agreement, unless an alternative payee has been communicated in writing
to the Officer Administering the Fund by a contracting authority in accordance
with a project agreement or a lenders’ direct agreement entered into between the
relevant contracting authority, service provider or the toll operator and project’s
financiers, as the case may be, payments to which alternative payee shall amount
to complete and final discharge of the Fund and the contracting authority to the
service provider and all its financiers for that particular invoice; and
(c) that the payment processes of the Officer Administering the Fund, including the
execution of the powers reserved for him or her under these Regulations shall be
completed and payments made no later than the time stipulated for such payments
under a project agreement.
(2) The Officer Administering the Fund shall specify forms and documents to be used by
contracting authorities in submitting payment requests to the Fund, in accordance with the
requirements of a project agreement.
(3) All payment requests to the Fund shall be submitted to the Fund not later than twenty
one Business days before the due date for such payment, without prejudice to any larger period
to the extent such is provided for under a project agreement.
(4) Any application for payment under this regulation shall, without prejudice to any
provision in these Regulations, be supported by such documents as may be required under a
project agreement, including the following—
(a) the name and address of the payee;
(b) the bank account details of the payee;
(c) an invoice from the contractor or other eligible contract party;
(d) any certificate required from a contracting authority and any independent expert
under the terms of a project agreement;
(e) a certified payment voucher, with all material fields duly populated and vetted; and
(f) any other information as may be specified by the Officer Administering the Fund
under sub-regulation (2) of this regulation.
Right to question and withhold payment instruction.
19. The Officer Administering the Fund shall, where it establishes that the requirements
in regulation 18 have not been met in any material particular, have the right to request
for clarification and rectification from the contracting authority, and the power to withhold
disbursements against invoices until such matters are resolved.

-- 343 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 345
[Subsidiary]
Opening of accounts, and equality of Fund liabilities.
20. (1) The Officer Administering the Fund shall cause to be opened in the name of the
Fund such bank accounts for the Fund in a bank or banks approved in accordance with section
28 of the Act, as may be necessary for the purposes for which the Fund is established.
(2) All liabilities relating to contracted obligations of the Fund shall be settled in the
manner prescribed under this regulation.
(3) The Officer Administering the Fund shall open sub-accounts in the name of each
project road supported under the Fund, and into which sub-account shall be remitted all toll
revenues realized from the said project road by a private party pursuant to these Regulations.
(4) Funds within a project sub-account shall be applied to the following purposes in the
following order, and for which reason the Officer Administering the Fund shall establish a
cash waterfall—
(a) payments for the toll operator;
(b) payments for the service provider;
(c) proportional payments to meet the costs of the Officer Administering the Fund;
(d) any professional fees incurred in the proper discharge of obligations under the
Regulations by the Officer Administering the Fund and the Oversight Committee:
Provided such fees shall be proportionally met out of the various project sub-
accounts where the advisory relates to a portfolio-wide matter, and allocated to a
specific project sub- account, where the advisory relates to issues on that individual
project road;
(e) any other payment declared to be eligible and directly linked to the project road
supported under the Fund.
Fund not to be overdrawn.
21. The Officer Administering the Fund shall ensure that no bank accounts of the Fund
are overdrawn.
Procedure for prefunding the Fund.
22. (1) Further to regulation 14 and upon the establishment of the Fund, and until toll
revenues collected on annual basis attain such a scale that the Projected Fund Ratio is equal
to or exceeds 1.3 times annual obligations of the Fund, the Officer Administering the Fund
shall cause to be appropriated such budgetary allocations as shall be adequate to meet the
Fund’s projected shortfall, and this shall be an ongoing duty until such a time as toll revenues
attain a Projected Fund Ratio of 1.3 or more.
(2) The Officer Administering the Fund shall, for purposes of this regulation, observe the
budget process for national government entities as prescribed in the Act.
Declaration and use of surplus Funds.
23. (1) Where, and pursuant to regulation 13(3) (c) and (d), there is a projected surplus,
the Committee, on the advice of the Officer Administering the Fund, may recommend to the
Cabinet Secretary the declaration of a projected surplus in the Fund, subject to sub-regulation
(2) of this Regulation.
(2) A projected surplus may only be declared where the Projected Fund Ratio is derived
against actual cash balances held within the Fund and not projected inflows.

-- 344 of 625 --

346 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Subject to sub-regulation (4) of this regulation, and regulation 13, projected surpluses
may be paid out of the Fund into the National Exchequer Account, provided such withdrawal
does not exceed the amount of the projected surplus and does not lead to a projected shortfall.
(4) Where projected surpluses are taken out of the Fund under the terms of these
Regulations, the surpluses shall be paid into the National Exchequer and applied to such
purposes as shall be determined by the Cabinet Secretary within the national budget
framework.
Moneys to be retained in Fund.
24. All receipts, savings and accruals of the Fund and the balance of the Fund at the close
of each financial year, shall be retained for the purpose for which the Fund is established.
Administrative costs.
25. The Officer Administering the Fund shall ensure the administration costs of the Fund
are managed within the framework permissible under the Act.
Superintendence of Fund expenditure.
26. The Officer Administering the Fund shall establish systems, protocols and procedures
necessary to ensure that—
(a) the Fund’s expenditure is controlled and is monitored, on an annual basis, against
the Fund’s approved revenue and expenditure plan;
(b) withdrawals from the Fund are only for the purposes of payment of approved
expenditure in accordance with these Regulations; and
(c) the records of expenditure relating to the Fund are kept and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and Regulations made thereunder.
Access to information.
27. In furtherance of its mandate under these Regulations, the Officer Administering the
Fund shall have power—
(a) to access any project related data that he or she may need from contracting
authorities in furtherance of his or her functions with respect to invoice
settlement;
(b) to call for such additional information with respect to requests for payments out
of the Fund as are necessary to satisfy the requirements of regulation 18;
(c) to issue financial management guidelines upon approval of the Committee relating
to the purposes and objects of these Regulations; and
(d) to publish at the start of each financial year, on its website, the following
information—
(i) amount and source of money received into the Fund as at the close of the
previous financial year;
(ii) clear credit balances of available funds for the current financial year;
(iii) quantum of committed eligible expenditure for the current financial year;
(iv) total number of projects and other eligible activities supported under the
Fund for the current financial year; and
(v) such other information that Fund stakeholders may reasonably request, and
approved by the Committee, from time to time.

-- 345 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 347
[Subsidiary]
Government financial Regulations.
28. The existing government financial and procurement Regulations shall, to the extent
they relate to the administration of public funds established under the Act, apply in the
administration of the Fund.
Submission of annual performance reports.
29. The Officer Administering the Fund shall prepare and submit to the Committee and
the Cabinet Secretary, within three months after the end of each financial year, an annual
Fund performance report relating to the previous financial year, detailing the extent to which
the Fund met its regulatory and development objectives in the period under review, and
highlighting challenges, threats and opportunities for the enhanced effectiveness of the Fund
in promoting the public interests secured under these Regulations.
Misconduct of public officers.
30. The provisions of the Act relating to offences by public officers, including financial
misconduct, shall apply to these Regulations.
Review of performance of the Fund.
31. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall at the elapse of ten years from the date of
commencement of these Regulations cause a review to be conducted of the performance of
the Fund in accordance with the requirements of the Act.
(2) The review shall determine whether the Fund has met the objectives for which it was
established.
(3) The report on the review shall be submitted to the Cabinet for approval.
(4) The review of the performance of the Fund under this regulation 31 shall be without
prejudice to the obligations of the Oversight Committee and the Officer Administering
the Fund prescribed under these Regulations for the more frequent reviews of the Fund’s
performance, in particular under Regulations 5, 10, 13, 14, 15, 22, 23, 26 and 29.
Alternative Arrangements and Winding Up.
32. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may, subject to the approval of the National Assembly, wind
up the Fund where the Cabinet Secretary considers that the Fund has successfully completed
the specific objectives for which it was created, or where it is demonstrated the Fund has
irredeemably failed to meet such objectives.
(2) Despite the provisions of sub-regulation (1), the Cabinet Secretary may wind up the
Fund if—
(a) the Fund no longer has obligations to eligible parties under these Regulations, or
where such obligations exist, upon demonstration that alternative arrangements
agreed with all project participants have been put into place to meet such
obligations; and
(b) the Committee has made its recommendations supporting such winding up or the
set up of such alternative arrangements, and which opinion shall have taken into
account any views and representations of any project participant supported under
or through the Fund; and
(c) the Cabinet has considered and approved the recommendation of the Cabinet
Secretary to wind up the Fund or to set up such alternative arrangements, and
Cabinet grants approval for such winding up to be moved before the National
Assembly.

-- 346 of 625 --

348 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) On the winding up of the Fund—
(a) the Officer Administering the Fund shall call on the contracting authorities to
request from the respective service providers or toll operators or other project
parties or their agents financial statements to confirm that there are no valid
outstanding obligations to service providers or toll operators or other involved
project parties and commitments for payment;
(b) subject to paragraph (a), the Officer Administering the Fund shall pay any amount
remaining in the Fund into the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the
national government;
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund, and shall meet any residual
liabilities of the Fund at the time of such winding up from the funds of the national
government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the National
Assembly;
(d) assets other than cash of the Fund shall be transferred to the National Treasury;
and
(e) the Fund Secretariat shall be disbanded.
(4) The Officer Administering the Fund shall prepare, and the Cabinet Secretary shall
submit to Parliament and to the Auditor-General, a final statement of accounts for audit
within nine months from the date of the decision to wind up the Fund.
Revocation of LN 307 of 1986.
33. The Public Roads Toll (Public Roads Toll Fund) Rules, 1986 (LN No 307 of 1986) made
under the Public Roads Toll Act are hereby revoked.

-- 347 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 349
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (FINANCIAL INCLUSION FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Provision
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Sources of the Fund.
5. Expenditure of the Fund.
6. Capital of the Fund.
7. Object and purpose of the Fund.
8. Delivery of Products and Services.
9. Role of the Cabinet Secretary in charge of MSMEs.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
10. Advisory Board.
11. Qualifications of members of the Board.
12. Vacation of office by Chairperson or a member of the Board.
13. Functions of the Board.
14. Chief Executive Officer of the Fund.
15. Vacation of office by Chief Executive Officer.
16. Secretariat of the Fund.
17. Administrator of the Fund.
18. Categories of financial services or products.
19. Eligibility conditions.
20. Lending to financial intermediary for on lending.
21. Matching funds by financial intermediary.
22. Interest or administrative fee on financial services or products.
23. Repayment.
24. Bank accounts for the Fund.
25. Administration costs.
26. Government financial Regulations.
27. Investment of funds.
28. Retention of receipts and earnings.
29. Accounts and audit.
30. Offences and penalties.
31. Protection from personal liability.
32. Winding up.

-- 348 of 625 --

350 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT
(FINANCIAL INCLUSION FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 213/2022]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Financial Inclusion
Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Act" means the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Administrator of the Fund" means a person designated as such under regulation 17(1);
"association" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Micro and Small
Enterprises Act (Cap. 499C);
"Board" means the Advisory Board established under regulation 10(1) of these
Regulations;
"borrower" means a person in receipt of a financial service or product advanced to that
person by the Fund;
"bottom of the pyramid" means a socio-economic group of persons with low disposable
income;
"Cabinet Secretary" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"chama" means a registered group of persons pursuing common objectives by pooling
resources together to empower one another economically;
"cooperative society" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Co-operative
Societies Act (Cap. 490);
"credit scoring" means a statistical analysis performed by the Fund or an agent or a
financial intermediary to determine the creditworthiness of an applicant to qualify for
subsequent and enhanced financial service or product under this Fund;
"eligible person" means a person with low disposable income or a registered micro, small
and medium enterprise, a chama, group, table banking group, a cooperative society or an
association intending to take a financial product or service to start a business or enhance an
existing business;
"enterprise" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Micro and Small
Enterprises Act (Cap. 499C);
"financial intermediary" means a micro-finance institution, a cooperative society, a
chama, a group or an association that holds funds from the Fund for on-lending;
"financial product" means a financial instrument including a loan which may be advanced
by the Fund to an eligible person under these Regulations;
"financial service" includes health insurance, retirement benefit scheme, universal health
coverage and universal social security which may be offered by the Fund to an eligible person
under these Regulations;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
"Fund" means the Financial Inclusion Fund established under regulation 3;

-- 349 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 351
[Subsidiary]
"group" means a registered self-help group with a common interest or whose aim is to
organize itself to work together or act together to achieve an economic objective;
"medium enterprise" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"micro enterprise" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Micro and Small
Enterprises Act (Cap. 499C);
"on-lending" means lending of a financial service or product by a financial intermediary
to a member or a third party on conditions determined by the Board;
"small enterprise" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Micro and Small
Enterprises Act (Cap. 499C); and
"table banking" means a group-based funding system where members of a group make
periodic monetary contributions to form a kitty from which members may borrow.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the Financial Inclusion Fund.
Sources of the Fund.
4. The Fund shall consist of—
(a) monies appropriated by the National Assembly for the purposes of the Fund;
(b) income generated from the proceeds of the Fund in form of interest and other
charges such as penalties;
(c) income from investments made by the Fund;
(d) grants, donations, bequests or other gifts made to the Fund; and
(e) monies from any other source approved by the Cabinet Secretary.
Expenditure of the Fund.
5. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in pursuance of the object and purpose for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be limited to annual budget estimates
prepared by the Administrator of the Fund and recommended by the Board to the Cabinet
Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSMEs) for approval and submission to the Cabinet Secretary for further
approval, at the beginning of the financial year to which they relate.
(3) Any revision of the approved budget estimates shall be referred to the Board and the
Cabinet Secretary for approval.
Capital of the Fund.
6. The capital of the Fund shall be as appropriated by the National Assembly or from any
other source provided for under regulation 4 of these Regulations.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
7. (1) The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to innovate, develop and deploy
bottom of the pyramid financial services and products that are affordable, accessible and
appropriate for the unserved and under-served persons, including credit, saving, insurance
and investment products.

-- 350 of 625 --

352 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1), the objects and purpose of the
Fund shall be to—
(a) promote financial inclusion through expanding access to credit by persons, micro,
small and medium enterprises, chamas, table banking groups, groups, cooperative
societies, associations and start-ups for economic growth and job creation;
(b) address the qualitative dimension of financial inclusion, in particular responsible
lending and borrowing, ethical practices, consumer rights and financial literacy;
(c) strengthen the financial and operational capacity of informal sector membership
based financial institutions including cooperative societies, chamas, table banking
groups and micro-finance institutions;
(d) promote market interventions to improve supply of affordable credit to Micro,
Small and Medium sized Enterprises (MSMEs) including credit-worthiness based
lending, risk pricing, business and financial management skills, and cost of doing
business;
(e) address the low participation of the non-formal wage workforce, namely informal
sector entrepreneurs and workers, smallholder farmers, pastoralists, fisherfolk and
other self-employed in health insurance and retirement benefit schemes, for the
purpose of achieving universal health coverage (UHC) and universal social security;
and
(f) provide for government counterpart funding for the savings for pension component
for beneficiaries, who shall be natural persons, of the Fund.
Delivery of Products and Services.
8. (1) The Fund shall ensure that its products and services are commercially viable, rapidly
scalable at reasonable cost and low operational risk without distorting the market.
(2) In facilitating the provision under paragraph (1), the Fund shall leverage on existing
commercial infrastructure, including mobile payments platforms and financial institutions,
including agency, co- financing and on-lending partnerships:
Provided that such partnerships are not exclusive or preferential, are technology neutral
and do not confer market advantage to any partners over competitors.
Role of the Cabinet Secretary in charge of MSMEs.
9. The Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) shall be responsible for—
(a) providing overall policy direction in implementation of the Fund;
(b) appointment of members of the Board under regulation 10(1)(e);
(c) appointment of the Chief Executive Officer under regulation 14(1);
(d) providing regular briefs to the Cabinet on the status of implementation of the
Fund;
(e) approval of the estimates of expenditure and revenue before submission to the
Cabinet Secretary;
(f) receipt of quarterly and annual financial and non-financial reports of the Fund; and
(g) receipt of any recommendations from the Board for policy guidance in furtherance
of the objects and purpose of the Fund.

-- 351 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 353
[Subsidiary]
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
Advisory Board.
10. (1) There is established a board to be known as the Advisory Board which shall consist
of—
(a) a non-executive Chairperson appointed by the President;
(b) the Principal Secretary to the National Treasury or his representative, designated
in writing;
(c) the Principal Secretary of the State Department for the time being responsible
for matters relating to micro, small and medium enterprises or his representative,
designated in writing;
(d) the Principal Secretary of the State Department for the time being responsible for
matters relating to cooperatives or his representative, designated in writing;
(e) three other persons, not being public officers, who shall be appointed by the
Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to micro,
small and medium enterprises; and
(f) the Administrator of the Fund, who shall be the Secretary of the Board and an ex-
officio member.
(2) The Board may invite any person to attend a meeting of the Board for the purpose of
assisting or advising the Board on any particular matter but such a person shall have no right
to vote at the meeting.
(3) The Chairperson and members of the Board appointed under paragraph (1)(a) and
(1)(e) respectively shall serve for a term of three years but shall, subject to satisfactory
performance, be eligible for re-appointment for one further term of three years, for a
maximum of two terms.
(4) The quorum necessary for transaction of the business of the Board shall be a simple
majority of the members.
(5) The conduct and regulation of the business and affairs of the Board shall be determined
by the Board.
Qualifications of members of the Board.
11. (1) A person shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairperson of the Board under
paragraph 10(1)(a) if that person—
(a) possesses a university degree in a relevant field from a university recognised in
Kenya;

-- 352 of 625 --

354 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) has leadership and management experience of not less than ten years and has
knowledge in any of the following fields—
(i) finance;
(ii) accounting;
(iii) economics;
(iv) law;
(v) enterprise development;
(vi) cooperative management;
(vii) information, communication and technology;
(viii) business and management; or
(ix) strategic management.
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(2) A person shall be eligible for appointment as a member of the Board under paragraph
10(1)(e) if that person—
(a) possesses a university degree in a relevant field from a university recognised in
Kenya;
(b) has leadership and management experience of not less than five years and has
knowledge in any of the following fields—
(i) finance;
(ii) accounting;
(iii) Economics;
(iv) enterprise development;
(v) cooperatives management;
(vi) information, communication and technology;
(vii) business and management;
(viii) law; or
(ix) strategic management; and
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
Vacation of office by Chairperson or a member of the Board.
12. The Chairperson or a member of the Board appointed under regulation 10(1) (a) and
(e) shall cease to hold office if—
(a) he resigns from office by notice in writing to the appointing authority;
(b) he is removed from office by the appointing authority upon being—
(i) absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board without permission
from the appointing authority;
(ii) adjudged bankrupt or enters into a composition scheme or arrangement
with his creditors;
(iii) convicted of an offense involving dishonesty or fraud;
(iv) convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term
exceeding six months;
(v) incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness;
(vi) otherwise unable or unfit to discharge his duties; or
(c) he dies.

-- 353 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 355
[Subsidiary]
Functions of the Board.
13. The Board shall—
(a) provide oversight on the administration of the Fund;
(b) approve operational policies to facilitate the attainment of the objects and purpose
of the Fund;
(c) determine additional disbursement conditions as the Board may consider
necessary;
(d) participate in the formulation of operational policy, regulation and programmes of
the Fund to address systemic financial market failure and malpractices including
predatory lending and pyramid schemes;
(e) develop operational policies to guide on—
(i) savings for borrowers, who shall be natural persons, of the Fund;
(ii) financial services and products under regulation 18 of these Regulations to
operationalize the Fund;
(iii) the eligibility criteria, online application procedure, credit scoring,
approval, disbursement and repayment of loans;
(iv) the development of loan management systems and solutions which among
others will include database of loan beneficiaries, loans disbursed, amounts
recovered and balances;
(v) capacity building in respect of eligible persons of the Fund; and
(vi) access and conduct of financial intermediaries;
(f) review and approve the estimates of annual revenue and expenditure of the Fund
and recommend them to the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for
micro, small and medium enterprises for approval and submission to the Cabinet
Secretary for approval;
(g) set the criteria and conditions for accessing the various financial services including
the rate of interest or administrative fee and recovery of financial services or
products; in furtherance of the objects and purpose of the Fund;
(h) monitor and evaluate the implementation and performance of the Fund;
(i) promote access to the services of the Fund to all Kenyans in all parts of the
Republic;
(j) review and approve the financial statements of the Fund before submission to the
Auditor General;
(k) review and approve operational policy on the management of assets, equipment
and all properties under the Fund;
(l) mobilize resources for the Fund;
(m) approve the opening and closing of bank accounts of the Fund by the Administrator
of the Fund;
(n) advise the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for micro, small and
medium enterprises generally on the operations of the Fund;
(o) determine the allocation criteria that will ensure equitable distribution of financial
products across the country, including the target number of eligible persons to be
advanced loans in any one particular year; and

-- 354 of 625 --

356 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(p) undertake any other activity that in the opinion of the Board, will promote and
facilitate realization of the objects and purpose of the Fund.
Chief Executive Officer of the Fund.
14. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Fund who shall be competitively
appointed by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises upon recommendation by the Board.
(2) The Board shall recommend three persons from whom one shall be appointed under
paragraph (1).
(3) Where a substantive Chief Executive Officer has not been appointed, the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for matters relating to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises shall
appoint a public officer to act as the Chief Executive officer.
(4) A person shall not be appointed as Chief Executive officer, unless that person—
(a) holds a degree in either economics, accounting, finance or any other relevant
degree from a recognized institution;
(b) has ten years of work experience of which five years shall be in senior management
level in a relevant field; and
(c) meets the requirement of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(5) A person appointed as a Chief Executive Officer shall hold office—
(a) for a term of four years subject to renewal for a further one term of four years; and
(b) on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for matters relating to micro, small and medium enterprises in
consultation with the Cabinet Secretary and the Salaries and Remuneration
Commission.
Vacation of office by Chief Executive Officer.
15. The Chief Executive Officer of the Fund shall cease to hold office if—
(a) he resigns from office by notice in writing to the appointing authority;
(b) he is removed from office by the appointing authority upon being—
(i) adjudged bankrupt or enters into a composition scheme or arrangement
with his creditors;
(ii) convicted of an offense involving dishonesty or fraud;
(iii) convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term
exceeding six months;
(iv) incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness;
(v) otherwise unable or unfit to discharge his duties; or
(c) he dies.
Secretariat of the Fund.
16. (1) There shall be a secretariat of the Fund headed by the Chief Executive Officer.
(2) The staff of the secretariat shall be competitively appointed by the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for matters relating to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises upon
recommendation by the Board.

-- 355 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 357
[Subsidiary]
(3) Where the Secretariat has not been constituted as envisaged under paragraph (1), the
Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
shall second public officers to perform the duties of the Secretariat.
Administrator of the Fund.
17. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall be the Chief Executive Officer appointed under
regulation 14(1).
(2) In administering the Fund, the Administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) open and operate such bank accounts with the approval of the Board and the
National Treasury;
(b) supervise and control the day-to-day administration of the Fund;
(c) in consultation with the Board, develop such policies as may be necessary for the
attainment of the objects and purpose of the Fund;
(d) consult with the Board on matters relating to the administration of the Fund;
(e) cause to be kept books of accounts and other books and records in relation to the
Fund of all activities and undertakings financed from the Fund;
(f) with the approval of the Board, outsource services and enter into and sign
commercial contracts or agreements in furtherance of the objects and purpose of
the Fund;
(g) be the custodian of the assets and properties of the Fund;
(h) open loan accounts of all successful applicants or financial intermediaries and
maintain a record of the amount disbursed and the balance thereof;
(i) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General, in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to
the Fund and showing the expenditure incurred from the Fund, and such details as
the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board may prescribe from time to time, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B);
(j) prepare quarterly and annual financial and non-financial reports in a format
prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board and submit the same to
the National Treasury with copies to the Controller of Budget and the Commission
on Revenue Allocation; and
(k) implement any recommendations from the Board for policy guidance in
furtherance of the objects and purpose of the Fund.
Categories of financial services or products.
18. (1) The financial services or products of the Fund shall include the following—
(a) loans;
(b) retirement benefits;
(c) health insurance benefits; and
(d) savings.
(2) The Fund shall leverage on credit scoring model to determine the creditworthiness of
an eligible person to qualify for subsequent and enhanced financial services or products.

-- 356 of 625 --

358 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Eligibility conditions.
19. Further to the eligibility criteria set in these Regulations, an eligible person may
qualify for a financial product or service under these Regulations—
(a) where an applicant is a natural person, if that person—
(i) is eighteen years of age and above; and
(ii) is a holder of a Kenyan national identification card.
(b) where an applicant is a micro, small and medium enterprise, a cooperative society,
chama, a group, a table banking group or any other association, if that applicant—
(i) has all members who are eighteen years of age and above; and
(ii) is registered by the relevant government institution.
Lending to financial intermediary for on lending.
20. A financial intermediary may apply and enter into a lending agreement for a loan from
the Fund for on-lending to a business person or micro, small and medium enterprises.
Matching funds by financial intermediary.
21. (1) Where a financial intermediary enters into a lending agreement with the Fund
under regulation 20, that financial intermediary may provide matching funds of at least the
amount that may be determined by the Board.
(2) A financial intermediary shall pay an interest or administrative fee as may be
determined by the Board, but where the financial intermediary provides matching funds
under paragraph (1), the interest or administrative fee shall be lower compared to where no
matching funds are provided.
Interest or administrative fee on financial services or products.
22. The interest or administrative fee payable by a beneficiary on a financial service or
product advanced under these Regulations shall be at a maximum rate of eight per centum per
annum on reducing balance:
Provided that where a beneficiary defaults, the interest or administrative fee payable shall
be nine and one half per centum on a reducing balance.
Repayment.
23. (1) A financial product or service advanced under these Regulations shall be repaid
in full within the period determined in the agreement.
(2) All sums due to the Fund shall be recoverable as a debt due to the Fund.
Bank accounts for the Fund.
24. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall open the main bank account at the Central
Bank of Kenya.
(2) The Administrator may open such other bank accounts in the Central Bank of Kenya
or commercial banks including trust accounts, or pension saving accounts with the approval
of the Board and the National Treasury to further the objects and purpose of this Fund.
Administration costs.
25. The Administrative costs of the Fund shall be met through appropriations of the State
Department responsible for matters relating to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.

-- 357 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 359
[Subsidiary]
Government financial Regulations.
26. The existing government financial and procurement Regulations shall, to the extent
they relate to the administration of public funds established under the Act, apply in the
administration of the Fund.
Investment of funds.
27. The Administrator of the Fund may invest any of the funds of the Fund which are not
immediately required for its purposes in such government securities as may be approved by
the Board under these Regulations.
Retention of receipts and earnings.
28. All receipts, earnings and accruals to the Fund, and the balance of the Fund at the
close of each financial year shall be retained by the Fund for the purposes of the Fund.
Accounts and audit.
29. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall cause to be kept all proper books and records
of account of the income, expenditure and assets of the Fund.
(2) Within a period of three months from the end of each financial year, the Administrator
of the Fund shall submit to the Auditor General the accounts of the Fund together with—
(a) a statement of the income and expenditure of the Fund during the year; and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Fund on the last day of that year.
(3) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and reported upon in accordance with the
Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B).
Offences and penalties.
30. (1) A public officer who—
(a) takes possession of the funds or assets of the Fund without lawful authority;
(b) misappropriates funds or assets of the Fund;
(c) causes any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the
manner provided in these Regulations;
(d) conceals information on finances of the Fund to obtain a financial benefit either
for the officer or another person; or
(e) engages in a corrupt act, that public officer commits an offence and shall be liable
to the penalty provided for under section 199 of the Act.
(2) An applicant or an agent of the Fund who fails to give proper information or gives
inaccurate or misleading information or falsifies information or misrepresents information
required under these Regulations to obtain a financial benefit, either for himself or herself
or for another person, that applicant or agent commits an offence and shall be liable to the
penalty provided for under section 199 of the Act.
Protection from personal liability.
31. No matter or thing done by the Chairperson or any member of the Board or any officer,
employee or agent of the Fund shall, if the matter or thing is done bona fide for the purpose
of executing any provision of these Regulations, render the chairperson, member, officer,
employee or agent or any person acting on their directions, personally liable to any action,
claim or demand whatsoever.

-- 358 of 625 --

360 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Winding up.
32. In the event of winding up of the Fund, the cash balances shall be transferred to the
Exchequer while other assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the National Treasury.

-- 359 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 361
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL PEACE
SUPPORT OPERATIONS FUND) REGULATIONS, 2023
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Provision
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Capital of the Fund.
5. Object and purpose.
6. Sources of funds.
7. Payment out of the Fund.
8. Retention of receipts.
9. Conditions for release of funds.
10. Management of the Fund.
11. Functions of the Defence Council.
12. Administrator of the Fund.
13. Secretariat support for Administrator of the Fund.
14. Bank Account of the Fund.
15. Overdrawn accounts.
16. Advances.
17. Investments of the funds.
18. Review of performance of the Fund.
19. Annual estimates.
20. Quarterly reports.
21. Accounts and audit.
22. Administration expenses.
23. Offences and penalties.
24. Effects of winding-up of the Fund.
25. Revocation of LN. No. 219/2022.

-- 360 of 625 --

362 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL PEACE
SUPPORT OPERATIONS FUND) REGULATIONS, 2023
[L.N. 58/2023]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (National Peace
Support Operations Fund) Regulations, 2023.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Administrator of the Fund" means the person designated as such under regulation 12
of these Regulations;
"Cabinet Secretary" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"Contingent Owned Equipment" means equipment and assets acquired by Government
of Kenya for purpose of Peace Support Operations;
"Defence Council" means the Defence Council established under Article 241(5) of the
Constitution;
"Equipment Park" means an area designated by the Defence Council for storage of
Contingent Owned Equipment and assets;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
"force generation" means a procedure in which required resources are mobilized with the
necessary capabilities at the right scale and readiness for Peace Support Operations;
"force projection" means ability to deploy forces for Peace Support Operations;
"Fund" means the National Peace Support Operations Fund established under regulation
3 of these Regulations;
"Peace Support Operation (PSO)" means peace keeping, enforcement or any other
support operation mandated by international or regional agencies involving diplomatic,
humanitarian organizations, military and any other components deployed by the National
Security Council outside the Country; and
"Public Sector Accounting Standards" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2
of the Act.
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a fund to be known as the National Peace Support Operations Fund
which shall operate under the budgeting, accounting, reporting and auditing framework of
the Act.
Capital of the Fund.
4. The initial capital of the Fund shall be seven billion shillings as appropriated by the
National Assembly as follows—
(a) one billion to be appropriated from the Exchequer; and
(b) six billion to be retained from Peace Support Operation reimbursable.
Object and purpose.
5. (1) The object and purpose of the Fund shall be to provide funds to support the
participation in Peace Support Operations (PSO) by the Kenya Defence Forces in accordance
with Article 240(8)(a) of the Constitution.

-- 361 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 363
[Subsidiary]
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1) of this regulation, the Fund shall
provide for—
(a) financing the establishment of equipment parks as approved by the Defence
Council for Peace Support Operation;
(b) financing for acquisition and maintenance of Contingent Owned Equipment and
other assets for Peace Support Operation;
(c) financing enhancement of units to attain appropriate levels at the United Nations
peacekeeping capability readiness system;
(d) funding of capacity building programmes including training facilities and
infrastructure development for the purpose of Peace Support Operation;
(e) funding force generation and force projection activities;
(f) funding research, monitoring and evaluation of activities related to Peace Support
Operation; and
(g) funding and facilitation of any other activities in furtherance of Peace Support
Operation approved by the Defence Council.
Sources of funds.
6. The Fund shall consist of—
(a) moneys appropriated by the National Assembly for purposes of the Fund;
(b) moneys received as reimbursement from Peace Support Operation for the
Government provision of Contingent Owned Equipment, assets and services
excluding personnel reimbursements;
(c) grants, donations, bequests or other gifts made to the Fund; and
(d) moneys from any other source approved by the Cabinet Secretary.
Payment out of the Fund.
7. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund moneys in respect of any expenses incurred in
pursuance of the object and purpose for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
budget estimates approved by the Defence Council at the beginning of the financial year to
which they relate.
(3) Any revision of the approved budget estimates shall be referred to the Defence Council
and the Cabinet Secretary for approval.
Retention of receipts.
8. The earnings of, or accruals to the Fund shall be retained in the Fund, and shall be
spent only for the objects and purposes for which the Fund is established unless the Cabinet
Secretary directs otherwise.
Conditions for release of funds.
9. (1) The funds shall only be released if—
(a) the release is approved by the Defence Council; and
(b) the release is to meet the expenses related to the objects and purpose of the Fund.
(2) The Defence Council may set out other conditions and requirements for release of fund
to ensure the efficient and effective management of resources.

-- 362 of 625 --

364 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Monies may additionally be released out of the Fund where such release—
(a) relates to expenditures that did not form part of the approved budget for the
financial year in accordance with provisions of the Act; and
(b) has been recommended by the Administrator of the Fund and submitted to the
Defence Council for approval.
(4) For purposes of paragraph (3) of these Regulations, a supplementary budget shall be
prepared by the Administrator of the Fund and approved in accordance with the provisions
of regulation 7;
Provided that the release under the supplementary budget complies with the requirements
of these Regulations.
Management of the Fund.
10. The Fund shall be managed by the Defence Council.
Functions of the Defence Council.
11. The functions of the Defence Council shall be—
(a) to formulate policies and guidelines for the regulation and management of the
Fund;
(b) in liaison with other relevant government state departments and agencies, to
continuously seek opportunities for participation in Peace Support Operation by
the Government of Kenya and determine the allocation of financial resources from
the Fund as required;
(c) to approve annual estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fund;
(d) to ensure retention funds of the preceding financial year are revoted;
(e) to ensure that only the personnel, assets and services provided to Peace Support
Operation conform to the required standards and are earmarked for funding under
these Regulations;
(f) to approve and review investment of surplus funds from the Fund;
(g) to advise the Cabinet Secretary on any additional sources of funds for the Fund; and
(h) to approve the financial statements and non-financial reports prepared by the
Administrator of the Fund.
Administrator of the Fund.
12. (1) The Principal Secretary in the Ministry responsible for matters relating to defence
shall be the Administrator of the Fund.
(2) The Administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(b) open and operate bank accounts at the Central Bank of Kenya into which all moneys
raised under the Fund shall be paid;
(c) operate and maintain bank accounts in the manner as may be prescribed by the
National Treasury from time to time;
(d) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General, in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to
the Fund;

-- 363 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 365
[Subsidiary]
(e) establish proper systems of internal control and management in accordance with
the provisions of the Act and these Regulations;
(f) advise and consult the Defence Council and Cabinet Secretary on matters relating
to the administration of the Fund;
(g) keep proper books of accounts and other books and records relating to the Fund;
(h) be the custodian of the Funds’ assets, equipment and properties under the Fund;
(i) prepare financial and non-financial performance report of the Fund and submit it
to the Defence Council for approval;
(j) furnish additional information which is proper and sufficient for the purpose of
examination and audit by the Auditor-General in accordance with the provisions
of the Public Audit Act, 2015 (Cap. 412B);
(k) prepare quarterly reports on the receipts into and issues out of the Fund; and
(l) undertake any other duties as the Defence Council may assign.
(3) When discharging the functions under paragraph (2) of this regulation, the
Administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) comply with the ordinary budget cycle in the preparation of estimates for the Fund;
and
(b) submit estimates of revenue and expenditure to the Cabinet Secretary by the 31st
January of the preceding financial year for approval.
Secretariat support for Administrator of the Fund.
13. (1) There shall be a secretariat to be known as the National Peace Support Operation
Secretariat which shall provide secretariat support services to the operation of the Fund and
shall be headed by the Administrator of the Fund.
(2) The Secretariat shall consist of such staff as the Defence Council may consider
necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the Fund under these Regulations.
Bank Account of the Fund.
14. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall cause an account in the name of the Fund to be
maintained at the Central Bank of Kenya in line with section 28 of the Act and any Regulations
made thereunder.
(2) All money payable into the Fund shall be received into the bank account of the Fund.
(3) The Fund’s account shall be operated by the Administrator of the Fund and two other
persons designated by the Defence Council from the Fund’s Secretariat.
(4) The Administrator of the Fund may open and maintain other accounts in furtherance
of the objective of the Fund.
Overdrawn accounts.
15. The Administrator of the Fund shall ensure the accounts of the Fund are not
overdrawn.
Advances.
16. (1) If, in exceptional circumstances, the income from the Fund together with any
surplus income brought forward from a previous year is insufficient to meet the actual or
estimated liabilities of the Fund, the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury may, with
the approval of National Assembly, may make advances to the Fund and such advances shall

-- 364 of 625 --

366 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
be made on such terms and conditions, whether as to repayment or otherwise, as the Cabinet
Secretary may determine, but any such advance shall be repaid from the income of the Fund.
(2) The Defence Council shall ensure that in any financial year expenditure and
commitments from the Fund shall not exceed the annual income of the Fund together with
any surplus income brought forward from a previous year.
Investments of the funds.
17. The Defence Council may with the consent of the Cabinet Secretary to the National
Treasury invest any of the surplus funds in Government securities.
Review of performance of the Fund.
18. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall at the lapse of ten years from the date of
commencement of these Regulations cause a review to be conducted on the performance of
the Fund in accordance with the requirements of the Act and Regulations thereunder.
(2) The review shall determine whether the Fund has met the objectives for which it was
established.
(3) The report on the review shall be submitted to the Cabinet and the National Assembly
for approval.
Annual estimates.
19. (1) At least six months before the commencement of each financial year, the
Administrator of the Fund shall cause to be prepared estimates of the revenue and expenditure
of the fund for that year.
(2) The annual estimates shall make provision for all estimated revenue and expenditure
from the Fund for the financial year and in particular, the estimates shall provide for—
(a) revenue projected to be received by the Fund from the sources of funds provided
for under these Regulations;
(b) expenses in furtherance of the objects and purpose of the Fund;
(c) moneys for the administration expenses of the Fund including—
(i) the payment of salaries, allowances and other charges in respect of the
secretariat staff, where applicable;
(ii) the payment of pensions, gratuities and other charges in respect of the staff
Fund, where applicable; and
(iii) the proper maintenance of the office assets, equipment and properties
under the Fund.
(3) The annual estimates shall be approved by the Defence Council before the
commencement of the financial year to which they relate.
Quarterly reports.
20. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall prepare quarterly financial and non-financial
reports in accordance with the format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards
Board for approval.
(2) Upon approval under paragraph (1), the Administrator of the Fund shall submit the
report to the National Treasury.
Accounts and audit.
21. (1) The Administrator shall cause to be kept all proper books and records of account
of the income, expenditure, assets, equipment and properties of the Fund.

-- 365 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 367
[Subsidiary]
(2) Within a period of three months from the end of each financial year, the Administrator
shall submit to the Auditor-General with a copy to the National Treasury, Controller of Budget
and the Commission for Revenue Allocation the accounts of the Fund together with—
(a) a statement of the income and expenditure of the Fund during the financial year;
and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Fund on the last day of that financial
year.
(3) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and reported upon in accordance with the
Public Audit Act (Cap. 412A).
Administration expenses.
22. The administrative expenses of the Fund shall not exceed three per centum of the
approved budget of each financial year.
Offences and penalties.
23. A person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists or causes
any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided in
these Regulations, commits an offence and shall be liable to the penalty provided for under
section 199 of the Act.
Effects of winding-up of the Fund.
24. (1) On winding up of the Fund in accordance with the Act and Regulations made
thereunder—
(a) the Administrator of the Fund shall compile any valid outstanding obligations and
commitments for payment;
(b) the Administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into
the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government;
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from the funds of the
national government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the
National Assembly; and
(d) assets, equipment and properties other than cash of the Fund shall be transferred
to the Ministry for the time being responsible for matters relating to defence.
(2) Within three months upon the decision to wind up the Fund, the administrator of the
Fund shall prepare final financial and non-financial statements of the Fund and submit them
to the Defence Council for approval.
(3) Upon approval under paragraph (2), the administrator shall submit the final financial
and non-financial statements to the Cabinet Secretary.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament and
to the Auditor-General for audit within three months from the date of the decision to wind
up the Fund.
Revocation of LN. No. 219/2022.
25. The Public Finance Management (National Peace Support Operations Fund)
Regulations, 2022, are revoked.

-- 366 of 625 --

368 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (ULINZI PRIME
HEALTH SERVICES FUND) REGULATIONS, 2023
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Provision
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
3. Establishment of the Fund and sources of funds.
4. The purpose and object of the Fund.
5. Expenditure on the Fund.
6. Retention of receipts.
7. Initial capital of the Fund.
PART III – GOVERNANCE AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND
8. Role of the Defence Council.
9. Establishment of the Advisory Board.
10. Meetings of the Advisory Board.
11. Functions of the Advisory Board.
12. Administrator of the Fund.
13. Managing Director of the Fund.
14. Secretariat of the Fund.
PART IV – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
15. Bank Account of the Fund.
16. Overdrawn accounts.
17. Advances.
18. Investments of the funds.
19. Review of performance of the Fund.
20. Annual estimates.
21. Quarterly reports.
22. Accounts and audit.
23. Administration expenses.
24. Offences and penalties.
25. Effects of winding-up of the Fund.

-- 367 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 369
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (ULINZI PRIME
HEALTH SERVICES FUND) REGULATIONS, 2023
[L.N. 175/2023]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Ulinzi Prime Health
Services Fund) Regulations, 2023.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Act" means the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Advisory Board" means the Ulinzi Prime Health Services Fund Advisory Board
established under regulation 9(1);
"Administrator of the Fund" means the person designated as such under regulation
12(1);
"Cabinet Secretary" has the meaning assigned to it under the Act;
"Defence Council" means the Defence Council established under Article 241 (5) of the
Constitution;
"Fund" means the Ulinzi Prime Health Services Fund established under regulation 3(1);
and
"Kenya Defence Forces hospital facilities" means the Kenya Defence Forces level IV, V
and VI hospitals.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND
Establishment of the Fund and sources of funds.
3. (1) There is established a fund to be known as the Ulinzi Prime Health Services Fund.
(2) There shall be paid into the Fund—
(a) such moneys as may be appropriated by the National Assembly;
(b) income generated from the proceeds of medical and health services offered by the
Kenya Defence Forces hospital facilities;
(c) grants, gifts and donations; and
(d) any moneys accruing to or received by the Fund from any other lawful source.
The purpose and object of the Fund.
4. The purpose and object of the Fund shall be to finance the provision of medical and
health services to paying clients of the Kenya Defence Forces hospital facilities across the
country, and in particular—
(a) facilitate the establishment, modernization, operation and the maintenance of the
Kenya Defence Forces hospital facilities;
(b) fund research and training for the purposes of improving the quality of health
services offered by the Kenya Defence Forces hospital facilities;
(c) facilitate the purchase of equipment and drugs for the Kenya Defence Forces
hospital facilities;
(d) provide funds for administration expenses including payment of salaries,
allowances, pensions, gratuity and other charges for its employees;

-- 368 of 625 --

370 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(e) provide any other funding that may be necessary to further the object of the Fund.
Expenditure on the Fund.
5. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in pursuance of the objects and purposes for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
work programs, plans and cost estimates which shall be prepared by the Administrator of the
Fund, submitted to and approved by the Defence Council at the beginning of the financial
year to which they relate.
(3) Any revision of the approved annual work programs, plans and of any cost estimate,
shall be referred to the Defence Council by the Advisory Board for approval.
Retention of receipts.
6. The earnings of, or accruals to the Fund shall be retained in the Fund, and shall be
spent only for the objects and purposes for which the Fund is established unless the Cabinet
Secretary directs otherwise.
Initial capital of the Fund.
7. The initial capital of the Fund shall be as appropriated by the National Assembly for
the Kenya Defence Forces hospital facilities or from any other source provided for under
regulation 3(2) of these Regulations.
PART III – GOVERNANCE AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND
Role of the Defence Council.
8. (1) The role of the Defence Council shall be to oversee the functioning of the Fund.
(2) In carrying out the role provided for under subregulation (1), the Defence Council shall
be responsible for—
(a) providing overall policy and direction in implementation of the Fund;
(b) approval of the estimates of expenditure and revenue before submission to the
Cabinet Secretary; and
(c) receipt of any recommendations from the Advisory Board for policy guidance in
furtherance of the objects and purpose of the Fund.
Establishment of the Advisory Board.
9. (1) There is established a board to be known as Ulinzi Prime Health Services Fund
Advisory Board which shall provide technical oversight on behalf of the Defence Council.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Defence, who shall be the Chairperson;
(b) Director of Medical Services, Defence Headquarters;
(c) a representative of the National Treasury;
(d) Director-General Ministry of Health or his representative;
(e) Director, Military Veteran Affairs;
(f) Head of Accounting Unit, Ministry of Defence;
(g) Chairperson, Advisory Committee of Veterans Affairs;
(h) Director Human Resource Management and Training, Ministry of Defence;

-- 369 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 371
[Subsidiary]
(i) Chief of Medical, Defence Headquarters; and
(j) Chief of Finance, Defence Headquarters.
(3) The Managing Director of the Fund appointed under regulation 13(1) shall be the
Secretary of the Advisory Board.
(4) The Advisory Board may, from time to time, co-opt other members as it may deem
necessary, for the proper and efficient discharge of its Advisory functions over the Fund.
Meetings of the Advisory Board.
10. (1) The Chairperson of the Advisory Board shall chair all the meetings of the Advisory
Board and in his absence the members present shall elect one of them to chair the meeting.
(2) The Advisory Board shall meet not less than four times in every financial year and
not more than four months shall elapse between the date of one meeting and the date of the
next meeting.
(3) The quorum for the conduct of meetings of the Advisory Board shall be five members.
(4) The Board shall regulate its own procedure.
Functions of the Advisory Board.
11. The functions of the Advisory Board shall be—
(a) to provide technical guidance on the administration of the Fund;
(b) to recommend policies to achieve the objects and purpose of the Fund;
(c) to receive, review and recommend the statutory and technical reports of the Fund;
(d) to advice the Defence Council and the Administrator of the Fund on the
administration of the Fund;
(e) to recommend the ceilings for funding under the Fund;
(f) to monitor and evaluate the programmes and activities under the Fund;
(g) to receive reports on the performance of the Fund;
(h) to facilitate public awareness, education and access to services offered by the Kenya
Defence Forces Hospital facilities; and
(i) to perform such other duties as may be considered necessary by the Defence
Council.
Administrator of the Fund.
12. (1) The Principal Secretary in the Ministry responsible for matters relating to defence
is hereby designated as the Administrator of the Fund in accordance with section 24(5) of the
Act.
(2) The Administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) be responsible for the day to day administration and management of the Fund;
(b) open and operate bank accounts at the Central Bank of Kenya into which all moneys
raised under the Fund shall be paid;
(c) prepare strategic plan, budget and annual work plan for approval by the Defence
Council;
(d) operate and maintain bank accounts in the manner as may be prescribed by the
National Treasury from time to time;

-- 370 of 625 --

372 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(e) prepare, sign and transmit to the Auditor-General, in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to
the Fund;
(f) establish proper systems of internal control and management in accordance with
the provisions of the Act and these Regulations;
(g) advise and consult the Defence Council and Cabinet Secretary on matters relating
to the administration of the Fund;
(h) keep proper books of accounts and other books and records relating to the Fund;
(i) be custodian of the Funds’ assets, equipment and properties;
(j) prepare financial and non-financial performance reports of the Fund and submit it
to the Defence Council for approval;
(k) furnish additional information which is proper and sufficient for the purpose of
examination and audit by the Auditor - General in accordance with the provisions
of the Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B);
(l) prepare quarterly reports on the receipts into and issues out of the Fund; and
(m) undertake any other duty as the Defence Council may assign.
(3) When discharging the functions under subregulation (2), the Administrator of the
Fund shall—
(a) comply with the ordinary budget cycle in the preparation of estimates for the Fund;
and
(b) submit estimates of revenue and expenditure to the Cabinet Secretary by the 31st
January of the preceding financial year for approval.
Managing Director of the Fund.
13. (1) There shall be a Managing Director of the Fund who shall be appointed by the
Defence Council on terms and conditions to be set by the Defence Council.
(2) A person appointed as a Managing Director shall be the head of the Secretariat
established under regulation 14(1).
Secretariat of the Fund.
14. (1) There shall be a secretariat which shall provide secretariat support services to the
operation of the Fund.
(2) The Secretariat shall consist of such personnel as the Defence Council may consider
necessary.
(3) The Secretariat of the Fund shall be reporting to the Administrator of the Fund, and
shall—
(a) develop a predictable, transparent and accountable financial internal control
systems for the Fund;
(b) prepare estimates of revenue and expenditure, annual work programs and work
plans, costs estimates, annual procurement plans and annual cash flow plans;
(c) prepare reports on a bi-monthly basis, on efficiency and effectiveness of programs
supported by the Fund;
(d) prepare and validate payment schedules;

-- 371 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 373
[Subsidiary]
(e) implement projects, programs and coordinate with other medical institutions and
Universities in realization of the objects and purpose of this Fund;
(f) monitor and evaluate programs financed from the Fund and provide reports to the
administrator of the Fund;
(g) prepare statutory and management reports of the Fund and submit them to the
administrator of the Fund; and
(h) maintain proper records of the Fund.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subregulation (3), the Administrator of the Fund
may assign any other duty to the Secretariat for the proper administration and management
of the Fund.
PART IV – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Bank Account of the Fund.
15. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall cause an account in the name of the Fund to be
maintained at the Central Bank of Kenya in line with section 28 of the Act and any Regulations
made thereunder.
(2) All money payable into the Fund shall be received into the bank account of the Fund.
(3) The Fund’s account shall be operated by the Administrator of the Fund and two other
persons designated by the Defence Council from the Fund’s Secretariat.
(4) The Administrator of the Fund may open and maintain other accounts in furtherance
of the objective of the Fund.
Overdrawn accounts.
16. The Administrator of the Fund shall ensure the accounts of the Fund are not
overdrawn.
Advances.
17. (1) If, in exceptional circumstances, the income from the Fund together with any
surplus income brought forward from a previous year is insufficient to meet the actual or
estimated liabilities of the Fund, the Cabinet Secretary may, with the approval of National
Assembly, make advances to the Fund and such advances shall be made on such terms and
conditions, whether as to repayment or otherwise, as the Cabinet Secretary may determine,
but any such advance shall be repaid from the income of the Fund.
(2) The Administrator of the Fund shall ensure that in any financial year expenditure and
commitments from the Fund shall not exceed the annual income of the Fund together with
any surplus income brought forward from a previous year.
Investments of the funds.
18. Administrator of the Fund may with the approval of the Defence Council and consent
of the Cabinet Secretary, invest any of the surplus funds in Government securities.
Review of performance of the Fund.
19. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall at the lapse of ten years from the date of
commencement of these Regulations cause a review to be conducted on the performance of
the Fund in accordance with the requirements of the Act and Regulations thereunder.
(2) The review shall determine whether the Fund has met the objectives for which it was
established.

-- 372 of 625 --

374 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) The report on the review shall be submitted to the Cabinet and the National Assembly
for approval.
Annual estimates.
20. (1) At least six months before the commencement of each financial year, the
Administrator of the Fund shall cause to be prepared estimates of the revenue and expenditure
of the Fund for that year.
(2) The annual estimates shall make provision for all estimated revenue and expenditure
from the Fund for the financial year and in particular, the estimates shall provide for—
(a) revenue projected to be received by the Fund from the sources of funds provided
for under these Regulations;
(b) expenses in furtherance of the objects and purpose of the Fund;
(c) moneys for the administration expenses of the Fund including—
(i) the payment of salaries, allowances and other charges in respect of the
secretariat staff, where applicable;
(ii) the payment of pensions, gratuities and other charges in respect of the staff
Fund, where applicable; and
(iii) the proper maintenance of the office assets, purchase of drugs and
equipment for hospital facilities and properties under the Fund.
(3) The annual estimates shall be approved by the Defence Council before the
commencement of the financial year to which they relate.
Quarterly reports.
21. (1) The Administrator of the Fund shall prepare quarterly financial and non-financial
reports in accordance with the format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards
Board for approval.
(2) Upon approval, under paragraph (1), the Administrator of the Fund shall submit the
report to the National Treasury.
Accounts and audit.
22. (1) The Administrator of shall cause to be kept all proper books and records of account
of the income, expenditure, assets, equipment and properties of the Fund.
(2) Within a period of three months from the end of each financial year, the Administrator
of the Fund shall submit to the Auditor-General with a copy to the National Treasury,
Controller of Budget and the Commission for Revenue Allocation the accounts of the Fund
together with—
(a) a statement of the income and expenditure of the Fund during the financial year;
and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Fund on the last day of that financial
year.
(3) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and reported upon in accordance with the
Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B).
Administration expenses.
23. The administrative expenses of the Fund shall not exceed three per centum of the
approved budget of each financial year.

-- 373 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 375
[Subsidiary]
Offences and penalties.
24. A person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists or causes
any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided in
these Regulations, commits an offence and shall be liable to the penalty provided for under
section 199 of the Act.
Effects of winding-up of the Fund.
25. (1) On winding up of the Fund in accordance with the Act and Regulations made
thereunder—
(a) the Administrator of the Fund shall compile any valid outstanding obligations and
commitments for payment;
(b) the Administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into
the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government;
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from the funds of the
national government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the
National Assembly; and
(d) assets, equipment and properties other than cash of the Fund shall be transferred
to the Ministry for the time being responsible for matters relating to defence.
(2) Within three months upon the decision to wind up the Fund, the Administrator of the
Fund shall prepare final financial and non-financial statements of the Fund and submit them
to the Defence Council for approval.
(3) Upon approval under subsection (2), the Administrator of the Fund shall submit the
final financial and non-financial statements to the Cabinet Secretary.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament and
to the Auditor-General for audit within three months from the date of the decision to wind
up the Fund.

-- 374 of 625 --

376 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (WILDLIFE
CONSERVATION TRUST FUND) REGULATIONS, 2023
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Provision
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Purpose of the Fund.
PART II – THE WILDLIFE CONSERVATION TRUST FUND
4. Initial capital.
5. Apportionment of funds.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
6. Members of the Governing Board.
7. Functions of the Governing Board.
8. Chief executive officer of the Fund.
9. Tenure of the chief executive officer.
10. Administrator of the Fund.
11. Functions of the chief executive officer.
12. Secretariat of the Fund.
13. Disbursements to be made in accordance with funding agreements.
PART IV – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
14. Application of Government Regulations and procedures.
15. Financial year of the Fund.
16. Preparation and submission of a work plan.
17. Quarterly and annual reports.
18. Record of disbursements.
19. Administration costs of the Fund.
20. Expenditure of the Fund.
21. Investment of surplus funds.
22. Retention of receipts, earnings and accruals.
23. Annual reports.
24. Audited accounts.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
25. Conflicts of interest.
26. Winding up of the Fund.
27. Effect of winding-up of the Fund.

-- 375 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 377
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (WILDLIFE
CONSERVATION TRUST FUND) REGULATIONS, 2023
[L.N. 220/2023]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Wildlife
Conservation Trust Fund) Regulations, 2023.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Administrator" means the person designated as the Administrator of the Fund under
regulation 10;
"beneficiary" means a legal entity that is a recipient of financial support from the Fund;
"Governing Board" means the governing board of the Wildlife Conservation Trust Fund
established under section 23(2) of the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act (Cap. 376);
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to
finance;
"ecosystem service" means any positive direct or indirect benefit that wildlife or
environment provides to people;
"Fund" means the Wildlife Conservation Trust Fund established under section 23(1) of the
Wildlife Conservation and Management Act (Cap. 376); and
"grantee" means a person or institution to whom a grant is made out of the Fund.
Purpose of the Fund.
3. The purpose of the Fund shall be as specified in section 23(4) of the Act.
PART II – THE WILDLIFE CONSERVATION TRUST FUND
Initial capital.
4. The initial capital for the Fund shall be two hundred million shillings provided out of
the voted funds of the State Department for Wildlife in the 2020/2021 financial year.
Apportionment of funds.
5. (1) The funds paid into Fund shall be apportioned for the following purposes—
(a) wildlife conservation initiatives for terrestrial and marine national parks, national
reserves, community conservancies and sanctuaries;
(b) conservation of endangered and endemic species;
(c) education awareness including advocacy for wildlife policies;
(d) wildlife conservation and national wildlife research priorities; and
(e) subject to subregulation 3, such other purposes as may be provided by the
Governing Board.
(2) The funds apportioned under subregulation (1) shall be disbursed in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the agreement between the Fund and the entity receiving the
funds.

-- 376 of 625 --

378 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subregulation (1), the Governing Board may, with
the approval of the Cabinet Secretary, vary the apportionment of funds in subregulation (1)
in favour of conservation and mitigation in any particular year.
PART III – MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND
Members of the Governing Board.
6. The Governing Board of the Fund shall consist of the persons specified in section 23(2)
of the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act (Cap. 376) who shall serve as a public-
private partnership in respect of the Fund.
Functions of the Governing Board.
7. The Governing Board shall—
(a) formulate the Fund’s strategic direction including strategic plans, investment
plans and policies;
(b) set up administrative, governance and financial management structures of the
Fund;
(c) consider and approve the procedures relating to eligibility criteria, processes, and
access to the Fund;
(d) oversee the administration and management of the Fund;
(e) supervise the performance of the chief executive officer of the Fund;
(f) consider, review and approve the estimates of revenue and expenditure of the Fund
for each financial year;
(g) consider and approve the opening of a bank account or bank accounts for the
purposes of the Fund and submit the proposal to open the bank account or bank
accounts to the Cabinet Secretary for approval;
(h) receive, review and approve statutory and management reports of the Fund before
the reports are submitted to the Auditor-General, Cabinet Secretary, Commission
for Revenue Allocation and Controller of Budget;
(i) approve, monitor and evaluate the programmes and activities of the Fund;
(j) set fundraising targets and mobilise resources for the Fund;
(k) approve, with the concurrence of the Cabinet Secretary, the investment policy,
investment plan and risk threshold of the Fund;
(l) receive and review reports on the performance of the Fund and make
recommendations thereon;
(m) review the Fund’s policies on the management of the Fund’s assets, equipment and
properties of the Fund;
(n) approve the criteria for funding requirements; and
(o) perform such other functions as may be necessary for the purpose of achieving the
objects for which the Fund is established.
Chief executive officer of the Fund.
8. (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Fund who shall be competitively
recruited and appointed by the Governing Board.

-- 377 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 379
[Subsidiary]
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the chief executive officer if that person—
(a) is a Kenyan citizen;
(b) possesses a Bachelor’s degree from a university recognised in Kenya;
(c) possesses at least ten years’ relevant experience in financial management and
resource mobilisation; and
(d) satisfies the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) A person is not qualified to be appointed as the chief executive officer if that person—
(a) is a member of any legislature in Kenya;
(b) has been adjudged bankrupt by a court of competent jurisdiction;
(c) is a member of the governing body of a political party;
(d) has been convicted of an offence the penalty of which is imprisonment for a term
of at least six months without the possibility of a fine;
(e) has been found to have violated any provision of the Constitution; or
(f) has been removed from any public office because of a conviction for an offence or
violation of the Constitution.
Tenure of the chief executive officer.
9. The chief executive officer shall serve for a term of three years and shall, upon
satisfactory performance, be eligible for reappointment for only one further term of three
years.
Administrator of the Fund.
10. The chief executive officer shall be the Administrator of the Fund.
Functions of the chief executive officer.
11. (1) The chief executive officer shall, subject to the direction of the Governing Board,
be responsible for the day-to-day management of the Fund.
(2) The chief executive officer shall—
(a) open and operate a bank account or bank accounts with the approval of the
governing board and the Cabinet Secretary;
(b) consult with the Governing Board on matters relating to the administration of the
Fund;
(c) cause to be kept proper books of account and records in relation to the Fund;
(d) prepare, sign and submit to the Governing Board, in respect of each financial year
and within three months after the end thereof, a statement of account relating to
the Fund for consideration and approval;
(e) prepare quarterly reports on financial and non-financial activities of the Fund
in accordance with the provisions of the Act and as may be prescribed by the
Public Sector Accounting Standards Board, and submit the reports to the Governing
Board for approval and transmission to the Cabinet Secretary, the Auditor-General,
Commission for Revenue Allocation and Controller of Budget;
(f) be the custodian of the assets, equipment and property of the Fund;
(g) engage the Fund’s stakeholders to secure funding commitments;

-- 378 of 625 --

380 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(h) develop, with the approval of the Governing Board, the operational and strategic
documents of the Fund including strategic plans, communication materials, grant-
making frameworks and operation manuals;
(i) facilitate the recruitment or secondment of the staff of the Fund;
(j) supervise and monitor utilisation of funds by beneficiaries and grantees;
(k) communicate effectively and in a timely manner to the contributors and
beneficiaries of the Fund;
(l) provide leadership for the programmes and operations of the Wildlife Conservation
Trust Fund; and
(m) perform such other functions as directed by the Governing Board that may be
necessary for the achievement of the objects for which the Fund is established.
Secretariat of the Fund.
12. (1) There shall be a secretariat of the Fund to be known as the Wildlife Conservation
Trust Fund Secretariat which shall provide secretariat and support services to the Fund and
shall be headed by the chief executive officer of the Fund.
(2) The Secretariat shall consist of such staff as the Governing Board may consider
necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the Fund under these Regulations.
(3) The staff of the Fund shall be recruited and appointed by the Governing Board on such
terms of service as may be determined by the Governing Board on the advice of the Salaries
and Remuneration Commission.
Disbursements to be made in accordance with funding agreements.
13. (1) The Governing Board shall establish a mechanism for evaluating proposals for
funding for the purposes of these Regulations.
(2) The chief executive officer shall enter into funding agreements with beneficiaries and
grantees who receive disbursements for the purposes of these Regulations from the Fund.
(3) The beneficiary or grantee to whom funds are disbursed under these Regulations, upon
receipt of the funds, shall utilise those funds in accordance with the funding agreement.
(4) A beneficiary or grantee who enters into a funding agreement under this regulation
shall return to the Fund any unutilised funds disbursed under these Regulations if—
(a) the purpose for which the funds were disbursed was not undertaken;
(b) the purpose for which the funds were disbursed was undertaken but the funds were
not fully utilised;
(c) savings have been realised as a result of a change in circumstances; or
(d) any other circumstances that may result in the non-utilisation of the funds.
(5) Funds returned under subregulation (3) shall be recorded by the Administrator as
receipts of the Fund.
(6) A beneficiary or grantee who fails to comply with the provisions of this regulation
shall not be eligible to receive funds from the Fund until that beneficiary or grantee has fully
complied with the provisions of this regulation or any other provision of these Regulations.

-- 379 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 381
[Subsidiary]
PART IV – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Application of Government Regulations and procedures.
14. Subject to the provisions of the Act, relevant existing Government Regulations and
procedures shall apply in the administration of the Fund’s financial resources.
Financial year of the Fund.
15. The financial year of the Fund shall be the period of twelve months ending on the 30th
June of every year.
Preparation and submission of a work plan.
16. The Administrator shall prepare a work plan in respect of a financial year and submit
it to the governing board for approval.
Quarterly and annual reports.
17. (1) The governing board shall submit quarterly and annual reports to the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for matters relating to wildlife conservation.
(2) The reports under subregulation (1) shall contain—
(a) in the case of a quarterly report, a summary of the proposals approved, rejected, or
deferred by the governing board in the preceding quarter as recommended by the
Administrator and indicating the funding status of such proposals, if any;
(b) in the case of an annual report, a summary of all the proposals that were received,
approved, rejected and deferred, the reasons for thereof, and the funding status of
any proposals that were approved, including any funds that have been paid back
to the Fund;
(c) a summary of the status of disbursements from the Fund for the implementation
of any proposals financed out of the Fund;
(d) any restrictions imposed on a non-compliant beneficiary or grantee;
(e) information on the financial and non-financial performance of the Fund; and
(f) such other relevant information that may inform the Cabinet Secretary responsible
for wildlife as to the financial and non-financial performance of the Fund.
(3) The Board shall prepare and submit annual monitoring and evaluation reports for the
Cabinet Secretary responsible for wildlife conservation.
Record of disbursements.
18. The Administrator shall keep and maintain an accurate record of disbursements from
and payments into the Fund which shall updated at least once in every month.
Administration costs of the Fund.
19. The administration costs of the Fund shall not exceed three per cent of the approved
annual budget of the Fund.
Expenditure of the Fund.
20. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in furtherance of the objects for which the Fund is established.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
work plans and cost estimates which shall be prepared by the Administrator and approved by
the governing board at the beginning of the financial year to which they relate.

-- 380 of 625 --

382 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Any revision of the approved annual work plans and of any cost estimate shall be
referred to the governing board for approval subject to the provisions of the Act.
Investment of surplus funds.
21. The Administrator may, with the approval of the governing board and the Cabinet
Secretary, invest any funds of the Fund which are not immediately required for the Fund’s
purposes.
Retention of receipts, earnings and accruals.
22. All receipts, earnings and accruals to the Fund and the balance of the Fund at the
close of each financial year shall be retained by the Fund for use for the purpose for which
the Fund is established.
Annual reports.
23. (1) The Administrator shall prepare annual financial and non-financial reports in
accordance with the provisions of the Act.
(2) In addition to the reports prepared under subregulation (1), the Administrator shall
prepare an annual general performance report of the Fund that shall be submitted to the
governing board together with the annual report under subregulation (1).
Audited accounts.
24. The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and reported on in accordance with the
provisions of the Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B).
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Conflicts of interest.
25. No member of the governing board shall hold any interest in any property of the Fund
otherwise than in the member’s capacity as a member of the governing board nor receive
remuneration nor be interested in the supply of work, goods or services to the Fund or any
other non-pecuniary conflict of interest.
Winding up of the Fund.
26. (1) In the case of the winding up of the Fund, the winding up shall be undertaken in
accordance with regulation 209 of the Public Finance Management (National Governments)
Regulations (L.N. 34 of 2015).
(2) Where the Fund is wound up, the cash balances shall be transferred to the Exchequer
and the other assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the national government.
Effect of winding-up of the Fund.
27. (1) On winding up of the Fund—
(a) the Administrator of the Fund shall compile any valid outstanding obligations and
commitments for payment;
(b) the Administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into
the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government;
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from the funds of the
national government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the
National Assembly; and
(d) assets, equipment and properties other than cash of the Fund shall be transferred
to the Ministry for the time being responsible for matters relating to wildlife
conservation.

-- 381 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 383
[Subsidiary]
(2) Within three months after the decision to wind up the Fund, the Administrator of
the Fund shall prepare final financial and non-financial statements of the Fund and submit
them—
(a) to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to wildlife conservation;
and
(b) to the Auditor-General to be audited and reported on in accordance with the Public
Audit Act (Cap. 412B).
(3) Upon approval under paragraph (2) (a), the Administrator shall submit the final
financial and non-financial statements to the Cabinet Secretary.

-- 382 of 625 --

384 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
PUBLIC FINANCE (KENYA MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT FUND) REGULATIONS, 2024
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF KENYA
MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT FUND
3. Establishment of Fund.
4. Object and purpose of the Fund.
5. Sources of the Fund.
6. Capital of the Fund.
7. Expenditure of the Fund.
8. Administration of the Fund.
9. Retention of receipts.
10. Fiscal accountability and compliance.
PART III – ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD
11. Establishment and composition of the Board.
12. Qualification for appointment to the Board.
13. Functions of the Board.
14. Meetings and procedure of the Board.
15. Procurement of goods works and services.
16. Chief Executive Officer.
17. Record disbursements to be kept.
18. Corporation Secretary.
19. Staff of the Board.
PART IV – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
20. Financial year.
21. Annual Estimates.
22. Books of accounts.
23. Accounts and audit.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
24. Close-out of the Grant Agreement.

-- 383 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 385
[Subsidiary]
PUBLIC FINANCE (KENYA MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT FUND) REGULATIONS, 2024
[L.N. 51/2024]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Kenya Millenmum
Development Fund) Regulations, 2024.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise request—
"accounting officer" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"bank account" means the Kenya Millennium Development bank account;
"Board" means the Kenya Millennium Development Fund Board established under
Regulation 11;
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury;
"Chief Executive Officer" means a person appointed as such under regulation 16;
"fiscal agent" means one or more individuals or a firm with expertise in financial
management engaged to perform certain financial management activities on behalf of the
Fund;
"Fund" means the Kenya Millennium Development Fund established under regulation 3;
"Government" means the Government of Kenya;
"Grant Agreement" means the Millennium Challenge Corporation Threshold Program
Grant Agreement signed between the Government of Kenya and the Government of the United
States of America, acting through the Millennium Challenge Corporation;
"implementing entity" means a government ministry, department, agency, bureau,
affiliate, government corporation or any other entity chartered or established by the
Government, or by a county government that are engaged by the Fund to play a role in
achieving or sustaining the project objectives as defined in the Grant Agreement;
"MCC" means the Millennium Challenge Corporation, a United States Government
Corporation established under the Millenmum Challenge Act of 2003, as amended (the "MCA
Act"), and an implementing agency of the United States of America;
"operating unit" has the meaning assigned to it under the Grant Agreement; and
"Threshold Program" means the projects and activities funded under the Grant
Agreement.
PART II – ESTABLISHMENT OF KENYA MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT FUND
Establishment of Fund.
3. There is established a Fund to be known as the Kenya Millennium Development Fund
which shall be the vehicle for implementation of the Threshold Program on behalf of the
Government.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
4. (1) The object and purpose of the Fund is to exercise and perform the Government’s
obligation to oversee, manage and implement the Threshold Program.

-- 384 of 625 --

386 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-paragraph (1), the object of the Fund is inter
alia managing the implementation of the projects and their activities, allocating resources for
the projects set out in the Grant Agreement, and managing procurements.
Sources of the Fund.
5. The Fund shall consist of —
(a) such moneys as may be granted for the Threshold Program under the Grant
Agreement;
(b) monies appropriated by the National Assembly for the Government; and
(c) grants, other than that provided under the Grant Agreement and donations, if
approved by Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) and the Board.
Capital of the Fund.
6. The initial capital of the Fund shall be a sixty million dollars grant from the Millennium
Challenge Corporation provided in accordance with the terms of the Grant Agreement,
and any other funds and resources that are necessary to carry out the Government's
responsibilities and obligations under the Grant Agreement.
Expenditure of the Fund.
7. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
in pursuant of the Threshold Program and accordance of the Grant Agreement.
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
work plans and cost estimates which shall be prepared by the Chief Executive Officer of the
Fund and approved by the Board, in accordance with the Grant Agreement requirements.
(3) Any revision of the approved annual work plan and of any cost estimate shall be
referred to the Board for approval in accordance with the Grant Agreement.
(4) Funds provided under these Regulations shall not be used for the purpose of supporting
activities outside the Grant Agreement.
Administration of the Fund.
8. (1) The Fund shall be administered by the Board which shall have legal and operational
independence to oversee the Threshold Program.
(2) In the process of administering the Fund under paragraph (1) the Board shall be able
to —
(a) perform the Government’s rights and responsibilities under the Grant Agreement
and bind the Government to the full extent of such rights and responsibilities;
(b) make its own budget and expend the grant funding provided under the Grant
Agreement;
(c) open and operate a bank account at a commercial bank in Kenya;
(d) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(e) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records in relation to
the Fund, of all activities and undertakings financed from the Fund in accordance
with the Grant Agreement;
(f) sue and be sued in its own name;
(g) enter into be bound by and enforce contracts in its own name, with private
and public entities including MCC, any Implementing Entity, employees, service
providers and consultants;

-- 385 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 387
[Subsidiary]
(h) engage any Implementing Entity and delegate certain powers and activities to such
in accordance with the Grant Agreement;
(i) insure against all normal commercial risks associated with its activities;
(j) engage an external fiscal agent to perform certain financial management activities;
(k) engage an external procurement agent to carry out and certify specific
procurement activities in furtherance of the threshold program;
(l) oversee all procurements for goods works and services required to implement the
Threshold Program in accordance with the MCC Program Procurement Guidelines,
as contemplated in section 4 (2) (f) of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal
Act (Cap. 412C);
(m) conduct or cause to be conducted on an annual basis (or on a more frequent basis
if required under the Grant Agreement) financial audits in accordance with MCCs
Accountable Entity Guidelines for Contracted Financial Audits;
(n) provide to the Auditor-General, in respect of each financial year and within three
months after the end thereof, a statement of accounts relating to the Fund and
submit a copy to the National Treasury, and the statements shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of the Grant Agreement;
(o) furnish additional information which isproper and sufficient for the purpose of
examination and audit by an independent auditor required in accordance with
the Grant Agreement including to MCC’s Office of Inspector-General and by the
Auditor-General; and
(p) prepare a quarterly report on the performance of the Fund and submit it to the
Board during each quarterly meeting.
(3) Every statement of account shall include details of the balance between the assets and
liabilities of the Fund and shall indicate the financial status of the Fund as at the end of the
financial year concerned.
Retention of receipts.
9. All deposits made to the bank account shall be retained by the Fund and used for
the purpose for which the Fund is established, subject to applicable provisions of the Grant
Agreement.
Fiscal accountability and compliance.
10. The grant shall be managed in accordance with section 2.5, section 4.4 and section
5 of the Grant Agreement.
PART III – ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD
Establishment and composition of the Board.
11. (1) There is established a board to be known as the Kenya Millenmum Development
Fund Board, which shall be a body corporate—
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a chairperson appointed by the President from among the three members
appointed at paragraph (f);
(b) the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to the
National Treasury;
(c) the Pnncipal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to
transport;

-- 386 of 625 --

388 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(d) the Pnncipal Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to urban
planning;
(e) the Attorney-General;
(f) three non-government members, one each selected by the Kenya Private Sector
Alliance, Kenya Alliance of Residents Associations, and Maendeleo ya Wanawake
Organization and appointed by the Cabinet Secretary; and
(g) the Chief Executive Officer who shall be the secretary to the Board and a member
without the right to vote at the meetings of the Board.
(3) The appointments under paragraph (2)(a) and (f) shall be by notice in the Gazette.
(4) Each member of the Board appointed under paragraph (2)(f) shall be selected by the
respective non-government organization and shall not be selected by the Government.
(5) Each member of the Board under paragraph (2)(b), (c), (d), and (e) shall have an
alternate with clear decision-making authority who is drawn from the same institution, is
designated in writing, and can attend Board meetings when such member cannot attend.
(6) Each member of the Board appointed under paragraph (2)(f) shall have an alternate
with clear decision-making authority who is drawn from the same institution selected through
the same internal selection process, is designated in writing, and can attend Board meetings
when such member cannot attend.
(7) The tenure of the members of the Board appointed under paragraph (2)(a) and (f) and
the Chief Executive Officer shall each be for a period not exceeding three years which may be
renewed only once for a period not exceeding three years.
Qualification for appointment to the Board.
12. A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the Board
if that person—
(a) holds a degree in a relevant field from a university recognized in Kenya
(b) has proven financial management or other relevant professional experience; and
(c) has served in a senior management position for a period of at least six years.
Functions of the Board.
13. (1) The Board shall—
(a) take responsibility for the proper management of the affairs of the Fund and shall
be accountable for the moneys, the financial business and the management of the
Fund;
(b) oversee and provide direction to the Fund, and ensure that the Funds management
unit is composed of qualified experts from the public or private sectors who are
hired through an open and competitive recruitment and selection process;
(c) protect preserve and manage the assets financed under the Grant Agreement and
ensure that the funding provided by MCC under the Grant Agreement is used for
its intended purposes;
(d) cause to be kept proper books of accounts and other books and records in relation to
the Fund, of all activities and undertakings financed from the Fund in accordance
with the Grant Agreement;
(e) ensure that regular audits of the Fund are conducted by an independent auditor
as required by the Threshold Program Grant Agreement (or as may otherwise be

-- 387 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 389
[Subsidiary]
agreed by MCC and the Board), and that statutory annual audits of the Fund are
conducted by the Auditor-General;
(f) follow the Fund s governing documents and regulations, including its mission to
implement the Grant Agreement;
(g) approve guidelines and internal operational policies for the proper management
of the Fund;
(h) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(i) perform the rights and responsibilities under the Grant Agreement and bind the
Government of Kenya to the full extent of such rights and responsibilities;
(j) open and operate a bank account at a commercial bank in Kenya;
(k) keep written minutes of all meetings held by the Board, which will reflect all
decisions made and all actions taken;
(l) ensure that the Fund’s records and accounts are accurate and complete;
(m) ensure that regular audits of the Fund by an independent auditor are performed
annually; and
(n) consider and approve the following documents agreements and actions on behalf
of the Fund—
(i) procurement plans fiscal accountability plans, Monitoring and Evaluation
plans Accountable Entity Anti-Fraud and Corruption Action Plans, the MCC
Human Resources Manual, and any material amendments or supplements
thereto;
(ii) agreements between the Government of Kenya or the Fund and MCC, and
any material amendment, suspension or termination of such agreements;
(iii) agreements (and any material amendment suspension or termination of
such agreements) between the Fund and any third-party auditor, the fiscal
agent, the Procurement Agent any bank, any implementing entity any
outside project manager or any Board member;
(iv) the selection performance evaluation, and termination of the Chief
Executive Officer,
(v) the human resources instruments, including the organizational chart, staff
grading, remuneration structure (salary grid) career guidelines (position
descriptions) and human resources policy (including a Human Resources
Manual);
(vi) the Fund policies, Board charter and any other Board guidelines;
(vii) form of employment agreement to be used for members of the management
unit;
(viii) the Fund’s organizational staffing plan, and any matenal amendments or
supplements thereto;
(ix) salary grid or scale with approved salary ranges and benefits for members
of the management unit, and any material amendments or supplements
thereto;
(x) any adoption of an alternative performance evaluation system and related
amendments to the MCA Human Resources Manual and any material

-- 388 of 625 --

390 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
ehanges to a previously-approved alternative performance evaluation
system;
(xi) Audit findings and reports of the results of audits received from the audit
committee;
(xii) any agreement that is with a party related to the Fund or any party that
controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with the Fund, or not
at arm’s length (that is, the parties are not dealing from equal bargaining
positions one party is subject to the other's control or dominant influence,
or the transaction is not treated with fairness integrity, and legality);
(xiii) any material amendments or supplements to the Fund's governing
documents;
(xiv) any decision to dispose of liquidate, dissolve, wind up, or reorganize the
Board including any decision to add or remove any Board member;
(xv) any formation or acquisition of a subsidiary or other related entity of the
Fund;
(xvi) any material changes to the components or structure of the Fund;
(xvii) any decision to engage accept, or manage any funds from any donor
agencies or donor organizations in addition to MCC’s funding during the
term of the Grant Agreement; and
(xviii) any other action that requires Board approval pursuant to the Grant
Agreement.
Meetings and procedure of the Board.
14. The conduct and regulation of the business and affairs of the Board shall be as
stipulated under section 8 of the State Corporations Act the Fund's internal regulations and
the Grant Agreement.
Procurement of goods works and services.
15. The Board shall ensure that all procurements for goods, works, and services required to
implement the Threshold Program are undertaken solely in accordance with the MCC Program
Procurement Guidelines.
Chief Executive Officer.
16. (1) The Board shall appoint a Chief Executive Officer of the Fund who shall be recruited
through an open and competitive process on a contract for a period not exceeding five years
or until the closure of the Threshold Program.
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Chief Executive Officer, if that
person—
(a) holds a degree in a relevant field from a university recognized in Kenya;
(b) has at least ten years knowledge and experience in financial management;
(c) has served in a senior management positionfor a period of at least five years; and
(d) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day operations of the Fund;
(b) for supervision, management and discipline of the staff of the Fund;
(c) executing the policies of the Board in respect of the mandate of the Fund;
(d) reporting to the Board on theperformance of Fund; and

-- 389 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 391
[Subsidiary]
(e) performing any other functions as may be assigned by the Board from time to time.
Record disbursements to be kept.
17. (1) The Chief Executive Officer shall maintain an accurate record of all payments from
the Fund for financing approved projects, and such record of payments shall be updated every
quarter required by the Board.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall submit to the Board an annual report on the Fund’s
activities, operations and expenditures.
Corporation Secretary.
18. (1) There shall be a Corporation Secretary to the Board who shall be competitively
recruited and appointed by the Board.
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Corporation Secretary if that
person—
(a) holds a degree from a university recognised in Kenya;
(b) is a Certified Public Secretary and a member of the Institute of Certified Public
Secretaries of Kenya in good standing;
(c) has previously held the position of corporation secretary or in a similar governance
role for a period of at least five years; and
(d) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(3) The Corporation Secretary shall be responsible for—
(a) providing guidance to the Board and Board members on their duties,
responsibilities and powers and how these should be exercised in the best interests
of the Fund;
(b) ensuring that Board procedures are followed and reviewed regularly, and that the
Board complies with the law, rules and regulations;
(c) assisting the Chairperson in organising Board activities including providing
information, preparing agenda, issuing notices and preparing for meetings, Board
evaluations and Board development programmes;
(d) providing secretarial services to the Board including ensuring that the Board work
plan is prepared and adhered to, circulating Board papers in advance of the meeting
keeping the record of attendance of the meetings;
(e) ensuring that the minutes of the Board and Board committees are promptly
prepared and circulated;
(f) keeping the Board abreast of and informed on, current governance thinking and
practise;
(g) keeping a record of conflicts of interest declared by each member of the Board; and
(h) co-ordinating the governance audit process.
Staff of the Board.
19. (1) The Board may appoint such number of professional, technical and administrative
staff for the Board.
(2) The staff appointed under sub-paragraph (1) shall serve on such terms and conditions
as the Board may, with the advice of the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, determine.

-- 390 of 625 --

392 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
PART IV – FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Financial year.
20. The financial year of the Fund shall be the period of twelve months ending on the
30th June in each year.
Annual Estimates.
21. (1) At least three months before the commencement of each financial year, the Board
shall cause to be prepared estimates of its revenue and expenditure for that year.
(2) The annual estimates shall make provision for the estimated expenditure of the Fund
for the financial year concerned and, in particular, shall provide for—
(a) the payment of salaries, allowances and other charges in respect of the staff of the
Fund;
(b) the payment of pensions, gratuities and other charges in respect of retirement
benefits to staff of the Fund;
(c) the proper maintenance of the buildings and grounds of the Fund; and
(d) the proper maintenance repair and replacement of the equipment and other
movable property of the Fund.
(3) The annual estimates shall be submitted to the Cabinet Secretary for approval before
the commencement of the financial year to which they relate and once approved, the sum
provided in the estimates shall not be increased without the prior consent of the Cabinet
Secretary.
(4) No expenditure shall be incurred for the purposes of the Fund except in accordance
with the annual estimates approved under this paragraph.
(5) The Government shall provide office space and finance its operations for the duration
of the Fund.
Books of accounts.
22. The Board shall cause to be kept proper books and records of account of the income,
expenditure, assets and liabilities of the Fund.
Accounts and audit.
23. (1) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Auditor-General or by an auditor
appointed by the Board with the written approval of the Auditor-General.
(2) Within a period of three months after the end of each financial year, the Board
shall submit to the Auditor-General or to an auditor appointed under sub-regulation (1) the
accounts of the Fund together with—
(a) a statement of income and expenditure of Fund during that year; and
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Fund on the last day of the financial
year.
(3) In addition to the Audit requirements set out in th e the Grant Agreement, the accounts
of the Fund shall be audited in accordance with the provisions of the Public Audit Act (Cap.
412B).
(4) The appointment of an auditor under sub-regulation (1) shall not be terminated by
the Board without the prior written consent of the Auditor-General.
(5) The Auditor-General may give general or special directions to an auditor appointed
under sub-regulation (1) and the audit or shall comply with those directions.

-- 391 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 393
[Subsidiary]
(6) An auditor appointed under sub-regulation (1) shall report directly to the Auditor-
General on any matter relating to the directions given by the Auditor-General.
(7) Within six months after the end of each financial year, the Auditor-General shall report
on the examination and audit of the accounts of the Funds to the Cabinet Secretary and, in
the case of an auditor appointed under sub-regulation (1), the auditor shall transmit a copy
of the report to the Auditor-General.
(8) Nothing in this Order shall be construed to prohibit the Auditor-General from carrying
out an inspection of Fund’s accounts or records whenever it appears desirable and the Auditor-
General shall carry out such an inspection at least once every six months
(9) The Cabinet Secretary shall lay the report prepared under sub-regulation (6) before
the National Assembly as soon as reasonably practicable after the report has been submitted
to him or her.
PART V – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Close-out of the Grant Agreement.
24. At the close out of the Grant Agreement, any cash balances on the grant shall be
returned promptly to MCC, while other assets of the Fund shall be disposed in accordance
with the Grant Agreement and the MCC Program Closure Guidelines.

-- 392 of 625 --

394 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 24(4)&(11)
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT AFFIRMATIVE ACTION FUND) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
PART II – THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AFFIRMATIVE ACTION FUND
3. Establishment of the Fund.
4. Sources of the Fund.
5. Expenditure of the Fund.
6. Object and purpose of the Fund.
7. Guidelines of the Fund.
PART III – ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION OF
THE BOARD AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND
8. Establishment and composition of the Board.
9. Functions of the Board.
10. Capital of the Fund.
11. Disbursements from the Fund.
12. Retention of receipts.
13. Emergency reserve.
14. Application of Government financial Regulations and procedures.
15. Administration of the Fund.
16. Establishment of National Government Affirmative Action Fund county
committees.
17. Chief Executive Officer.
18. Secretariat of the county committee.
PART IV – PROJECTS
19. Projects to be in respect of national government functions and community-
based.
20. Process of applying for funds at the county level.
21. Sharing of funds at the county level.
22. Quarterly reports on projects and disbursements.
23. Eligibility criteria for applicants.
PART V – FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
24. Fund bank accounts.
25. Record of disbursements to be kept.
PART VI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
26. Costs of running the Fund.
27. Offences and penalty.
28. Winding up of the Fund.
29. Revocation of L.N. No. 24 of 2015.

-- 393 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 395
[Subsidiary]
SCHEDULE — CONDUCT OF THE AFFAIRS AND BUSINESS OF THE BOARD

-- 394 of 625 --

396 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT AFFIRMATIVE ACTION FUND) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 52/2016, L.N. 104/2019]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (National
Government Affirmative Action Fund) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"affirmative action" has the meaning assigned to it under Article 260 of the Constitution;
"affirmative action group” includes women, the youth, persons with disabilities, children
and the elderly as may be organised into a savings and credit co-operative or some similar
organisation;
"accounting officer" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Board" means the National Government Affirmative Action Fund Board established under
regulation 8;
“Cabinet Secretary” means the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for
matters relating to finance;
"Chief Executive Officer" means the Chief Executive Officer of the Fund appointed under
regulation 17;
"county Affirmative Action Fund bank account" means the National Government
Affirmative Action Fund account for each county opened under regulation 24;
"county committee" means the National Government Affirmative Action Fund Committee
established under regulation 16;
"county co-ordinator" means a person appointed as a county- coordinator of the Fund
under regulation 18;
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
“Fund” means the National Government Affirmative Action Fund established under
regulation 3;
“Fund bank account” means the Fund's bank account opened under regulation 25;
“officer administering the Fund” means a person designated as the administrator of the
Fund under regulation 15(1);
“Public Sector Accounting Standards Board” has the meaning assigned to it by section 2
of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
“revenue” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Commission on Revenue
Allocation Act (Cap. 428);
“revolving fund” means a fund established by the recipient affirmative action group for
receiving funds and disbursing loans under regulation 6(2); and
“youth” has the meaning assigned to it under Article 260 of the Constitution.

-- 395 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 397
[Subsidiary]
PART II – THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AFFIRMATIVE ACTION FUND
Establishment of the Fund.
3. There is established a fund to be known as the National Government Affirmative Action
Fund which shall vest in and be operated by the Board.
Sources of the Fund.
4. The Fund shall consist of—
(a) such moneys as may be appropriated by the Parliament from the national
government's share of revenue;
(b) grants and donations;
(c) income generated from the proceeds of the Fund; and
(d) any monies accruing to or received by the Fund from any other source.
Expenditure of the Fund.
5. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund payments in respect of any expenses incurred
pursuant to the object and purpose for which the Fund is established.
(2) Payments shall only be made out of the Fund where—
(a) the Fund administrator has based the payments on annual work programmes;
(b) the Fund administrator has based the payments on cost estimates; and
(c) the Board has approved the annual work programmes and cost estimates at the
beginning of the financial year to which they relate.
(3) The Fund administrator shall submit to the Board any revised annual work
programmes or cost estimates for approval.
(4) Funds provided under these Regulations shall not be used for the purpose of supporting
political parties or entities.
Object and purpose of the Fund.
6. (1) The object and purpose of the Fund is to complement the measures of the National
Government on affirmative action.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1), the object of the Fund is to
provide for—
(a) enhancement of access to financial facilities for affirmative action groups;
(b) support of value addition initiatives by affirmative action groups;
(c) socio cultural development and nurturing of talent for affirmative action groups
including promotion of the arts, music or sports;
(d) enhancement of access to services for survivors of gender-based violence, female
genital mutilation, child marriages or forced marriages, through the establishment
of rescue centres and legal aid centres and other similar facilities;
(e) support of affirmative action groups through bursaries and scholarships to access
education opportunities;
(f) establishment of drugs and substance abuse rehabilitation and counselling centres
in conjunction with the relevant Government agencies;

-- 396 of 625 --

398 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(g) conducting civic education and community sensitisation on the National
Government affirmative action programmes and policies; and
(h) any other function necessary to give effect to the provisions of this paragraph.
(3) Despite the provisions of paragraph (2), the Fund shall not—
(a) allocate more than twenty percent of its funds for the enhancement of access to
financial facilities by affirmative action groups;
(b) allocate more than twenty percent of its funds to bursaries or scholarships for
affirmative action groups; or
(c) allocate more than ten percent of its funds to conducting civic education or
community sensitisation on National Government affirmative action programmes.
(4) The Fund shall perform its functions in conjunction with the relevant National
Government ministries, agencies or departments.
Guidelines of the Fund.
7. The Board shall, in consultation with the Cabinet Secretary, develop guidelines for the
proper management of the Fund.
PART III – ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION OF
THE BOARD AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUND
Establishment and composition of the Board.
8. (1) There is established a board to be known as the National Government Affirmative
Action Fund Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate with a common seal and perpetual succession,
and shall, in its corporate name, be capable of—
(a) suing and being sued;
(b) holding, acquiring, or otherwise dealing with any property or any interest in
property; and
(c) doing all such things that a body corporate is capable of doing under these
Regulations.
(3) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a chairperson appointed by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating
to gender affairs from among the persons appointed under subparagraphs (e) or (g);
(b) the Principal Secretary in the Ministry responsible for matters relating to gender
affairs;
(c) the Principal Secretary to the National Treasury;
(d) the Principal Secretary in the Ministry of responsible for social security services;
(da) the Principal Secretary in the State Department for the time being responsible for
planning;
(e) one person to represent the youth or persons with disability and appointed by the
Cabinet Secretary;
(f) deleted by LN 104 of 2019, r. 2;
(g) three other persons appointed by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters
relating to gender affairs for their knowledge or expertise in affirmative action; and

-- 397 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 399
[Subsidiary]
(h) deleted by LN 104 of 2019, r. 2.
(4) A person is qualified to be appointed under paragraph (2)(e), (1) or (g) if that person—
(a) holds a degree in social sciences from a university recognised in Kenya;
(b) has at least five years' experience in the relevant area of expertise; and
(c) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(5) Any appointment under paragraph (2) shall be in accordance with Article 27 of the
Constitution.
[LN 104 of 2019, r. 2.]
Functions of the Board.
9. (1) The functions of the Board shall be to—
(a) receive, review and approve project proposals for funding from each county in
accordance with these Regulations;
(b) oversee the management of the Fund;
(c) receive, review and approve the reports of the Fund; and
(d) perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Cabinet Secretary responsible
for matters relating to gender affairs for the proper management of the Fund.
(2) The Board shall conduct and regulate its business and affairs of the Board as provided
in the Schedule.
Capital of the Fund.
10. The initial capital of the Fund shall be two billion and thirty million shillings
appropriated by Parliament in the financial year that these Regulations come into force.
Disbursements from the Fund.
11. (1) The disbursements from the Fund shall be done by the designated signatories.
(2) Each disbursement from the Fund shall be approved by the Board and recorded in the
minutes of the Board.
(3) The Board shall disburse from the Fund an equal amount to each constituency.
(4) The Board shall disburse funds out of the Fund bank account to each county Affirmative
Action Fund account at the beginning of the first quarter of each financial year.
(5) Subject to the Act and these Regulations, the initial disbursement by Board to each
county committee after the commencement of these Regulations shall be equivalent to twenty
five per cent of the annual allocation for the county.
(6) Each disbursement to a county committee from the Fund shall be for a specific project
approved in accordance with these Regulations.
(7) Each county committee shall, within thirty days after the close of the financial year,
submit to the Board the records including copies of relevant bank statements of the amounts
received by the county committee from the Board and expenditures of the county committee
in the financial year to which the records relate.
(8) The Board shall not disburse any sum from the Fund to a county committee that does
not comply fully with the requirements of paragraph (6).
(9) The Board shall set out the general conditions and requirements to be met by county
committees for the disbursement of funds.

-- 398 of 625 --

400 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(10) The Board may impose reasonable requirements including restrictions on a particular
county for the disbursement of funds.
(11) Where the Board imposes any requirement or restriction on a county committee for
the disbursement of funds, it shall be report the imposition of the requirement or restriction
to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to gender affairs.
(12) The Board shall, at least once in every month, make a report of its disbursements to
county committees to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to gender affairs.
Retention of receipts.
12. (1) All receipts, earnings and accruals to the Fund, and the balance of the Fund at
the end of the financial year, shall be retained by the Fund for use for the purpose for which
the Fund is established.
(2) All funds allocated to a county committee shall be cumulative and shall be carried
forward from one financial year to the next including funds retained in the accounts in
accordance with paragraph (1) or funds which are not utilised for whatever reason.
Emergency reserve.
13. (1) A portion of the Fund, equivalent to two per cent which shall be known as the
"Emergency Reserve", shall remain unallocated by the Board and shall be available to cover
emergencies faced by affirmative action groups.
(2) The administration of the Emergency Reserve shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Constitution, the Act, these Regulations and any other relevant written law.
(3) The Board shall determine the allocation of the Emergency Reserve to each county
committee:
Provided that the total allocation from the Emergency Reserve shall not exceed the
threshold under paragraph (1).
Application of Government financial Regulations and procedures.
14. Subject to the provisions of the Act, the existing Government financial Regulations
and procedures shall apply in the administration of the Fund.
Administration of the Fund.
15. (1) The accounting officer of the State Department responsible for matters relating
to gender affairs shall be designated as the administrator of the Fund.
(2) The administrator of the Fund shall—
(a) open and operate a bank account at the Central Bank of Kenya or a bank approved
by the National Treasury for the purposes of the Fund;
(b) supervise and control the administration of the Fund;
(c) consult with the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to gender
affairs on matters relating to the administration of the Fund;
(d) cause to be kept proper books of account and other books and records in relation
to the Fund of all activities and undertakings by the Fund;
(e) prepare in the manner that the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board may
prescribe, sign and submit to the Auditor-General, in respect of each financial
year and within three months after the end of each financial year, a statement of
accounts relating to the Fund and submit a copy to the National Treasury;

-- 399 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 401
[Subsidiary]
(f) furnish such additional information which is proper and sufficient for the purpose
of examination and audit by the Auditor-General of the statement of accounts
relating to the Fund in accordance with the provisions of the Public Audit Act (Cap.
412B); and
(g) prepare a quarterly report on the receipts into and disbursements out of the Fund
and submit it to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for gender affairs.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to gender affairs shall publish
the report submitted by the administrator of the Fund under paragraph (2)(g) by the 21st of
every third month.
(4) Every statement of account prepared by the administrator of the Fund shall include
details of the balance between the assets and liabilities of the Fund and indicate the financial
status of the Fund at the end of the financial year to which the statement relates.
(5) Each financial year, five per cent of the annual allocation to the Fund shall be set aside
for the Fund secretariat, of which three per cent shall be shared among all county committees.
(6) At the coming into force of these Regulations an amount totalling five hundred million
shillings shall be set aside for the purchase of vehicles for use by the Fund secretariat and for
each county secretariat.
Establishment of National Government Affirmative Action Fund county committees.
16. (1) There shall be established a county committee to be known as the National
Government Affirmative Action Fund Committee in each county.
(2) Each county committee shall—
(a) ensure that the projects funded under these Regulations comply with the objects
and purposes set out in these Regulations;
(b) ensure compliance with the guidelines on the disbursement of funds for projects
approved under these Regulations;
(c) oversee the implementation of projects financed through the Fund;
(d) oversee the monitoring and evaluation of projects or programmes funded under
these Regulations;
(e) identify through a participatory process projects to be funded under these
Regulations;
(f) receive, review and recommend to the Board for approval proposals prepared
through a participatory process for funding;
(g) prepare quarterly and annual reports on the operations of the Fund;
(h) sensitise the community on the object and purpose of the Fund;
(i) ensure projects recommended for funding are guided by national development
priorities and are not duplicated; and
(j) perform any other function required under these Regulations or any other written
law.

-- 400 of 625 --

402 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Each county committee shall consist of—
(a) one person each from each of the constituencies in the county who shall be
nominated through a participatory process and have the following qualifications—
(i) be a citizen of Kenya;
(ii) hold a minimum of a post-secondary school certificate from an institution
recognised in Kenya;
(iii) have at least three years' experience in matters relating to rural
development, affirmative action or social development; and
(iv) meet the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution;
(b) a representative of persons with disability appointed by the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for matters related to gender affairs and who shall meet the
requirements prescribed under paragraph (a);
(c) the county commissioner or his or her nominee;
(d) the national government officer in charge of the county responsible for gender
affairs or his or her nominee; and
(e) the county co-ordinator who shall be an ex officio member and who shall be the
secretary to the Committee.
(4) The quorum at the meeting of the county committee shall be one-third of the members
of the committee and decisions at a meeting of the committee shall be by a majority of those
present and voting.
(5) The county committee shall at its first meeting elect a chairperson and vice chairperson
from among its members who shall be of opposite sexes.
(6) The respective county commissioner shall convene the first meeting and preside over
the election of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson as well as file a return to the Fund
secretariat.
(7) Members of the county committee shall be appointed by notice in the Gazette by the
Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to gender affairs.
(8) A person shall cease to be a member of the county committee—
(a) if that person dies;
(b) if that person resigns in writing from office;
(c) if that person is removed from office by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members
of the committee on any of the following grounds—
(i) lack of integrity;
(ii) gross misconduct;
(iii) conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction for embezzlement of public
funds;
(iv) bringing the image of the county committee into disrepute through
unbecoming personal public conduct;
(v) causing disharmony within the county committee; or
(vi) physical or mental infirmity.
(9) A member of a county committee, other than an ex officio member, shall serve for a
term of three years which may be renewed once:
Provided that the member shall not have ceased to be a member of the county committee
in accordance with paragraph (8).

-- 401 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 403
[Subsidiary]
(10) A decision to remove a member under paragraph (8)(c) shall be made through a
resolution of the committee by at least two-thirds of the members:
Provided that the member sought to be removed shall be given a fair hearing before the
resolution is made.
(11) Whenever a vacancy occurs in the county committee by reason of resignation,
removal, incapacitation or death of a member appointed under paragraph (3)(a) or (b), the
vacancy shall be filled from the same category of persons from which the member was
appointed.
Chief Executive Officer.
17. (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Fund who shall be appointed by the
Board.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer of the Fund shall be recruited through a competitive
process and appointed by the Board in accordance with the provisions of Article 234(5) of the
Constitution, the Act and these Regulations.
(3) A person shall qualify to be appointed as the Chief Executive Officer if that person—
(a) is a citizen of Kenya;
(b) holds a degree in social sciences from a university recognised in Kenya;
(c) has at least five years' experience in matters relating to rural development or
affirmative action; and
(d) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
(4) A person appointed as the Chief Executive Officer shall serve for a term of three years,
which may be renewed for one further term of three years.
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall only be subject to the directions of the Board and
shall be responsible for the day to day administration of the affairs of the Fund including the
staff of the Board.
Secretariat of the county committee.
18. (1) There shall be a secretariat of the county committee in each county which shall
consist of—
(a) a county co-ordinator appointed by the Board from the relevant county;
(b) a monitoring and evaluation officer appointed by the Board; and
(c) not more than three other officers as may be required appointed by the Board.
(2) The officers of the county secretariat shall be appointed through an open and
competitive process.
(3) A person shall not be appointed as a county co-ordinator unless that person holds at
least a degree in accountancy, finance, economics or social sciences.
(4) The county co-ordinator shall be the custodian of all the records and equipment of
the Fund at the county level.
(5) The county secretariat shall be responsible for project monitoring, evaluation,
coordination and the proper keeping of records.

-- 402 of 625 --

404 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
PART IV – PROJECTS
Projects to be in respect of national government functions and community-based.
19. (1) A project under these Regulations shall—
(a) only relate to functions of the national government under the Constitution;
(b) be community-based; and
(c) ensure that the benefits of the project are available to a widespread cross-section
of the inhabitants of the community.
(2) Each project shall be identified at the constituency level through a participatory
process.
(3) The Board shall only approve the disbursement of funds for a complete project or a
defined phase of a project.
(4) A project may include—
(a) the acquisition of land and buildings; and
(b) the costs related to studies, planning and design or other technical input for the
project.
(5) In this regulation, "project" shall not include the recurrent costs for a facility.
Process of applying for funds at the county level.
20. (1) The county committee shall, once in every year, through public notices in all the
wards within the county, invite interested members of the public to submit project proposals
for funding.
(2) The county committee shall receive and review all project proposals and prepare a list
of the projects to recommend to the Board for approval the projects to be funded.
(3) The county co-ordinator shall submit the list prepared under paragraph (2) to the Chief
Executive Officer who shall submit them to the Board for approval of funding.
(4) On the application of a county committee, the Board may reallocate funds approved
for a project to another project in the same sector:
Provided that the amount reallocated from one project to another shall not exceed ten per
cent of the funds allocated for that project during a financial year.
Sharing of funds at the county level.
21. (1) The county committee may allocate up to fifty per cent of the funds disbursed to
it by the Board to county-wide projects.
(2) The county committee may disburse up to fifty per cent of the funds disbursed to it by
the board to constituency-based projects.
(3) Despite paragraphs (1) and (2), the county committee shall allocate funds for projects
after accounting for administrative, and monitoring and evaluation costs of the county
secretariat.
Quarterly reports on projects and disbursements.
22. The Board shall, at least once in every three months, submit a report to the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for matters relating to gender affairs and a copy of the report to the

-- 403 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 405
[Subsidiary]
parliamentary committee responsible for matters relating to affirmative action and social
development, detailing—
(a) a summary of the project proposals approved by the Board in the preceding three
months and the funding status of such projects;
(b) a summary of the status of disbursement of funds to the respective county
committees for the preceding three months;
(c) a summary of the status of disbursements from the Ministry responsible for gender
affairs to the Fund account; and
(d) any restriction imposed on the respective county committee in accordance with
these Regulations.
Eligibility criteria for applicants.
23. (1) An affirmative action group shall qualify for funding under these Regulations
where—
(a) for an affirmative action group—
(i) it is registered under any relevant written law;
(ii) it is comprised of at least one hundred women members;
(iii) it operates a revolving fund account to receive funds and advance loans to
eligible members in accordance with these Regulations;
(iv) it is based and operational in the constituency for which it seeks to make
the application;
(v) it operates a table banking structure where members make monthly or
quarterly contributions in accordance with the group's internal guidelines;
(vi) it has a bank account in the name of the group;
(vii) it has a minimum of its funding of at least three hundred thousand shillings;
and
(viii) its revolving fund is used for achieving the objects of the group; or
(b) for an institution composed of affirmative action groups—
(i) it is a registered entity;
(ii) it has registered affirmative action groups among its members;
(iii) it has a minimum of its funding of at least three hundred thousand shillings;
and
(iv) its revolving fund is used for achieving the objects of the institution and
should be revolved among the registered affirmative action groups.
(2) An application for funds shall be accompanied by a resolution of a proper constituted
meeting of the affirmative action group or institution and the resolution shall be recorded in
the minutes of that meeting.
(3) An agreement for funding under these Regulations shall be made between the county
committee on behalf of the Government and an affirmative action group or institution and
shall be in the prescribed form.

-- 404 of 625 --

406 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(4) The prescribed form under paragraph (3) shall provide—
(a) that any loan advanced to a member of an affirmative action group shall attract an
interest rate of five percent of which—
(i) three percent shall be retained as savings of the affirmative action group;
and
(ii) two percent may be used to pay the administrative costs of the affirmative
action group;
(b) that any member of an affirmative action group who has been advanced a loan by
the group shall be allowed a three month grace period before being required to
commence the repayment of the loan:
Provided that any loan advanced to a member of an affirmative action group shall be
repayable within a period of two years after the expiry of the grace period;
(c) that any amount paid on account of the repayment of a loan advanced by an
affirmative action group shall be paid into the bank account of the group and the
group shall issue the person paying the amount with a receipt for the amount paid;
(d) upon verifiable proof of loan repayment of all loan proceeds, the affirmative group
shall issue a discharge certificate to the recipient person with respect to the loan
repayment;
(e) each affirmative action group that has received funds from the county committee
shall submit a quarterly report to the county co-ordinator on the financial and non-
financial activities of the group; and
(f) any other information that the county committee, on behalf of the Board, may
require.
PART V – FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
Fund bank accounts.
24. (1) The Fund bank account shall be opened and maintained at the Central Bank of
Kenya.
(2) The signatories to the Fund bank account shall be the Chief Executive Officer and two
other persons authorised by the Board from among the staff of the Board secretariat.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer's signature and the signature of at least one of the other
persons authorised under sub-regulation (2) shall be required before funds are paid out of the
Fund bank account.
(4) For the disbursement of funds by the Board, the Board shall, with the approval of the
National Treasury, open and maintain a bank account for each county committee styled the
"(Name of county) National Government Affirmative Action Fund Account" bank account in
every county into which all funds will be received or paid out of.
(5) Each county National Affirmative Action Fund bank account shall have at least two
signatories who shall be the national sub-county accountant, the county co-ordinator and at
least one other officer designated by the Chief Executive Officer in writing.
(6) At least two signatories shall be required for every cheque or instrument for payment
or withdrawal of funds from the county Affirmative Action Fund bank account held in every
county and the signatories shall be such that—
(a) the sub-county accountant is a mandatory signatory; and
(b) at least one other authorised signatory shall sign.

-- 405 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 407
[Subsidiary]
(7) Every payment or instruction for payment out of the respective county Affirmative
Action Fund bank account shall be on the basis of a resolution of the relevant county
committee recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which the resolution was made and shall
comply with the provisions of the Act and these Regulations.
(8) All receipts, savings and accruals to any county Affirmative Action Fund bank account
and the balances thereof at the end of each financial year shall be returned to the National
Government Fund Account.
Record of disbursements to be kept.
25. (1) The Board Secretariat shall keep and, at least once in every month, update, an
accurate record of all disbursements from the Fund account to the county Affirmative Action
Fund account.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall submit to the Board a report on the activities,
operations and expenditures of the Fund during that financial year.
(3) At the end of every financial year, the Chief Executive Officer shall submit the financial
statements of the Fund to the Board in a format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting
Standards Board for approval and immediately thereafter, the Board shall approve and submit
the financial statements to the Auditor-General.
PART VI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Costs of running the Fund.
26. (1) The administration costs of a county committee shall not be more than five per
cent of the total disbursement made to the county committee in the financial year.
(2) Despite the provisions under paragraph (1), the costs of monitoring and evaluation
shall not be more than two percent of the total disbursement to the county committee in the
financial year.
(3) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and reported upon in accordance with the
Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A) and the Public Audit Act (Cap. 412B).
Offences and penalty.
27. Any person who misappropriates any funds or assets from the Fund, or assists or causes
any person to misappropriate or apply the funds otherwise than in the manner provided
in the Act and these Regulations, commits an offence and shall, upon conviction, be liable
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding ten million
shillings or to both.
Winding up of the Fund.
28. If the Fund is wound up, the cash balances of the Fund shall be transferred to the
National Exchequer account while other assets of the Fund shall be transferred to the Ministry
for the
time being responsible for matters relating to gender affairs.
Revocation of L.N. No. 24 of 2015.
29. The Public Finance Management (Affirmative Action Social Development Fund)
Regulations (L.N. 24/2015), are hereby revoked.

-- 406 of 625 --

408 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
SCHEDULE
CONDUCT OF THE AFFAIRS AND BUSINESS OF THE BOARD
(r. 9(2))
1. Term of office
Members of the Board shall, subject to the provisions of this Schedule, hold office for a
term of three years, on such conditions as may be specified in the instrument of appointment
but shall be eligible for reappointment for a further term of three years.
2. Vacancy in office of member of Board
A member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, may—
(1) at any time resign from office by notice in writing to the Cabinet Secretary responsible
for matters relating to gender affairs; or
(2) be removed from office by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters related to
gender affairs, if the member—
(a) has been absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board without just
cause;
(b) is adjudged bankrupt or enters into a scheme of composition or arrangement
with his or her creditors;
(c) is convicted of an offence involving dishonesty or fraud;
(d) is incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness; or
(e) is otherwise unable or unfit to discharge his or her functions.
3. Meetings of the Board
(1) The Board shall meet at least four times in every financial year ad not more than four
months shall elapse between one meeting of the Board and the next.
(2) Unless three-quarters of the total members of the Board otherwise agree, at least
fourteen days' written notice of a meeting of the Board shall be given to each member
of the Board.
(3) The quorum for the conduct of the business of the Board shall be five members
excluding the Secretary, and the majority of the quorum shall be formed by non ex
officio members.
(4) The Chairperson shall preside at every meeting of the Board at which he or she is
present but in the Chairperson's absence, the members present shall elect one of
their number who shall preside at that meeting and shall enjoy the powers of the
Chairperson for the purposes of that meeting.
(5) The decisions of the Board shall be reached by consensus or where that fails, by
majority vote of the members present and voting.
(6) Subject to the requirement under paragraph (3), a meeting of the Board shall not be
invalid merely because of a vacancy in the membership of the Board.
(7) Subject to these Regulations, the Board shall regulate its own procedure.
4. Disclosure of interest
(1) If a member is directly or indirectly interested in any matter being considered
by the Board, and is present at a meeting of the Board at which that matter is
being considered, he or she shall disclose that fact as soon as practicable after the

-- 407 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 409
[Subsidiary]
commencement of the meeting and shall not take part in the consideration of that
matter or be counted in the quorum of the meeting at which that matter is considered:
Provided that if the majority of the members present at that meeting are of the opinion
that the experience or expertise of that member is vital to the deliberations of the
meeting, the Board may permit that member to participate in the deliberations subject
to any restrictions the Board may impose on the member.
(2) A disclosure of an interest made under this paragraph shall be recorded in the minutes
of the meeting at which the disclosure is made.
5. Minutes
The Board shall cause minutes of the proceedings of all its meetings to be entered in books
kept for that purpose.

-- 408 of 625 --

410 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Order under section 24(8)
THE GOVERNMENT COAST AGENCY CLEARING FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Provision
1. Citation.
2. Winding up of Fund.
3. Transitional provisions.

-- 409 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 411
[Subsidiary]
THE GOVERNMENT COAST AGENCY CLEARING FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
[L.N. 48/2023]
Citation.
1. This Order may be cited as the Government Coast Agency Fund (Winding-up) Order,
2023.
Winding up of Fund.
2. The Government Coast Agency Fund is wound up.
Transitional provisions.
3. On the winding up of the Fund—
(a) the administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into the
National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government; or
(b) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from funds of the national
government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the National
Assembly; and
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament.

-- 410 of 625 --

412 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE JOINT CONSOLIDATED FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
ARRANGEMENT OF PARAGRAPHS
Paragraph
1. Citation.
2. Winding up of Fund.
3. Transitional provisions.

-- 411 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 413
[Subsidiary]
THE JOINT CONSOLIDATED FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
[L.N. 49/2023]
Citation.
1. This Order may be cited as the Joint Consolidated Fund (Winding-Up) Order.
Winding up of Fund.
2. The Joint Consolidated Fund is wound up.
Transitional provisions.
3. On the winding up of the Fund—
(a) the administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into the
National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government; or
(b) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from funds of the national
government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the National
Assembly; and
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament

-- 412 of 625 --

414 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE KENYA LOCAL LOANS SUPPORT FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Provision
1. Citation.
2. Winding up of Fund.
3. Transitional provisions.

-- 413 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 415
[Subsidiary]
THE KENYA LOCAL LOANS SUPPORT FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
[L.N. 50/2023]
Citation.
1. This Order may be cited as the Kenya Local Loans Support Fund (Winding-Up) Order,
2023.
Winding up of Fund.
2. The Kenya Local Loans Support Fund is wound up.
Transitional provisions.
3. On the winding up of the Fund—
(a) the administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into the
National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government; or
(b) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from funds of the national
government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the National
Assembly; and
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament.

-- 414 of 625 --

416 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PRE-SHIPMENT INSPECTION FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Provision
1. Citation.
2. Winding up of Fund.
3. Transitional provisions.

-- 415 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 417
[Subsidiary]
THE PRE-SHIPMENT INSPECTION FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
[L.N. 47/2023]
Citation.
1. This Order may be cited as the Pre-shipment Inspection Fund (Winding-Up) Order,
2023.
Winding up of Fund.
2. The Pre-shipment Inspection Fund is wound up.
Transitional provisions.
3. On the winding up of the Fund—
(a) the administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into the
National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government; or
(b) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from funds of the national
government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the National
Assembly; and
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament.

-- 416 of 625 --

418 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE TREASURY MAIN CLEARANCE FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
ARRANGEMENT OF PARAGRAPHS
Paragraph
1. Citation.
2. Winding up of Fund.
3. Transitional provisions.

-- 417 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 419
[Subsidiary]
THE TREASURY MAIN CLEARANCE FUND (WINDING-UP) ORDER, 2023
[L.N. 51/2023]
Citation.
1. This Order may be cited as the Treasury Main Clearance Fund (Winding-Up) Order.
Winding up of Fund.
2. The Treasury Main Clearance Fund is wound up.
Transitional provisions.
3. On the winding up of the Fund—
(a) the administrator of the Fund shall pay any amount remaining in the Fund into the
National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government; or
(b) the Cabinet Secretary shall pay any deficit in the Fund from funds of the national
government in the National Exchequer Account with the approval of the National
Assembly; and
(c) the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a final statement of accounts to Parliament.

-- 418 of 625 --

420 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 24(8)
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (UWEZO FUND) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Winding up L.N. 21 of 2014.
3. Transfer of outstanding amounts.
4. Transition of Staff.
5. Revocation L.N. 21/2014.

-- 419 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 421
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT
(UWEZO FUND) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 79/2019]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Uwezo Fund)
(Revocation) Regulations.
Winding up L.N. 21 of 2014.
2. The Uwezo Fund established under the Public Finance Management (Uwezo Fund)
Regulations (L.N. 21/2014) is wound up.
Transfer of outstanding amounts.
3. (1) Any amounts remaining in the Uwezo Fund shall be paid into the National
Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall, with the approval of the National Assembly, pay any
deficit in the Fund from funds of the national government in the National Exchequer Account.
(3) Any outstanding loan between the Uwezo Fund and a beneficiary shall on the
commencement of these Regulations, become a loan between the Biashara Kenya Fund
established under regulation 3 of the Public Finance Management (Biashara Kenya Fund)
Regulations and the same beneficiary, with the same rights and subject to the same
obligations and the loan shall be deemed to be a single continuing loan.
Transition of Staff.
4. (1) In the regulation, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Administrator" means the Principal Secretary of the State Department for the time being
responsible for gender affairs or any other person designated by the Cabinet Secretary, in
writing for that purpose;
"Biashara Kenya Fund" means the Biashara Kenya Fund established under regulation 3 of
the Public Finance Management (Biashara Kenya Fund) Regulations.
(2) Subject to paragraph (4), a person who, immediately before the commencement of
these Regulations, was an employee of the Government serving in the Uwezo Fund shall serve
in the Biashara Kenya Fund.
(3) Despite Regulation (2), employees of the Government serving in the Uwezo Fund
immediately before the commencement of these Regulations shall, upon the commencement
of these Regulations, be given an option to serve in the Biashara Kenya Fund and if not
appointed be redeployed in the public service.
(4) Before appointing a person to whom paragraph (2) applies, the Administrator, in
consultation with the Public Service Commission, shall—
(a) require such person to make an application for employment or appointment to the
Fund; and
(b) using the criteria determined by the Public Service Commission, vet such a person
to ensure that he or she is fit and proper to serve in the position applied for in the
Biashara Kenya Fund.
(5) A person who, immediately before the commencement of these Regulations, was
an employee of the Government serving in the Uwezo Fund immediately before the
commencement of these Regulations, who fails to meet the vetting criteria set under
paragraph (4), may be deployed in the public service.

-- 420 of 625 --

422 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of this regulation, and for as long as the Administrator
has not appointed staff to serve in the Biashara Kenya Fund, the staff of the Uwezo Fund shall
continue to perform those functions and their acts shall be deemed to be those of the Biashara
Kenya Fund
Revocation L.N. 21/2014.
5. The Government Financial Management (Uwezo Fund) Regulations (L.N. 21/2014) are
revoked.

-- 421 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 423
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (YOUTH ENTERPRISE
DEVELOPMENT FUND) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Winding up.
3. Transfer of outstanding amounts.
4. Revocation of LN 167 of 2006.

-- 422 of 625 --

424 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (YOUTH ENTERPRISE
DEVELOPMENT FUND) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 81/2019]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Youth Enterprise
Development Fund) (Revocation) Regulations.
Winding up.
2. The Youth Enterprise Fund established under the Government Financial Management
(Youth Enterprise Development Fund) Regulations (L.N. 167/2006) is wound up.
Transfer of outstanding amounts.
3. (1) Any amounts remaining in the Youth Enterprise Development Fund shall be paid
into the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall, with the approval of the National Assembly, pay any
deficit in the Fund from funds of the national government in the National Exchequer Account.
(3) Any outstanding loan between the Youth Enterprise Development Fund and a
beneficiary shall on the commencement of these Regulations, become a loan between the
Biashara Kenya Fund established under regulation 3 of the Public Finance Management
(Biashara Kenya Fund) Regulations, 2019 and the same beneficiary, with the same rights and
subject to the same obligations and the loan shall be deemed to be a single continuing loan.
Revocation of LN 167 of 2006.
4. The Government Financial Management ((Youth Enterprise Revocation Development
Fund) Regulations (L.N. 167/2006) are revoked.

-- 423 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 425
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (YOUTH ENTERPRISE
DEVELOPMENT FUND) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Winding up. LN 167 of 2006.
3. Transfer of outstanding amounts.
4. Revocation. LN 167 of 2006.

-- 424 of 625 --

426 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (YOUTH ENTERPRISE
DEVELOPMENT FUND) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 58/2021]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Youth Enterprise
Development Fund) (Revocation) Regulations, 2021.
Winding up. LN 167 of 2006.
2. The Youth Enterprise Fund established under the Government Financial Management
(Youth Enterprise Development Fund) Regulations, 2007 is wound up.
Transfer of outstanding amounts.
3. (1) Any amounts remaining in the Youth Enterprise Development Fund shall be paid
into the National Exchequer Account for the credit of the national government.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall, with the approval of the National Assembly, pay any
deficit in the Fund from funds of the national government in the National Exchequer Account.
(3) Any outstanding loan between the Youth Enterprise Development Fund and a
beneficiary shall on the commencement of these Regulations, become a loan between the
Biashara Kenya Fund established under regulation 3 of the Public Finance Management
(Biashara Kenya Fund) Regulations, 2021 and the same beneficiary, with the same rights and
subject to the same obligations and the loan shall be deemed to be a single continuing loan.
Revocation. LN 167 of 2006.
4. The Government Financial Management (Youth Enterprise Development Fund)
Regulations, 2006 are revoked.

-- 425 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 427
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 58(9)
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (CREDIT GUARANTEE SCHEME) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Objects of the Regulations.
PART II – CREDIT GUARANTEE SCHEME
4. Establishment of the Scheme.
5. Funds of the Scheme.
PART III – ADMINISTRATION OF THE SCHEME
6. Steering Committee.
7. Functions of the Steering Committee.
8. Administrator of the Scheme.
9. Scheme Manager and staff.
10. Eligible borrowers.
11. Ineligible borrowers.
12. Eligible financial intermediaries.
13. Applications by financial intermediaries.
14. Conditions for guarantee by the Scheme.
15. Invoking a guarantee.
16. Payment of claims.
17. Record of recovery costs.
18. Claim to be paid in sixty days.
19. Reports by participating financial intermediaries.
20. Reports by the Scheme Manager.
21. Cabinet Secretary may prescribe additional conditions.
PART IV – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
22. Offences and penalties.

-- 426 of 625 --

428 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (CREDIT
GUARANTEE SCHEME) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 197/2020]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Credit Guarantee
Scheme) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires —
"Administrator" means the Administrator of the Scheme who shall be the Principal
Secretary in the Ministry responsible for matters relating to finance;
"borrower" means a person in whose favour a credit facility has been granted by a financial
intermediary, part of which has been guaranteed under these Regulations;
"enterprise" means an undertaking or a business concern engaged in the production of
goods, provision of services or trade in goods;
"financial intermediary" means a bank, a microfinance bank and any other institution
designated as a financial intermediary by the Cabinet Secretary in accordance with regulation
12 (1) (a); and
"Scheme" means the Credit Guarantee Scheme established under regulation 4.
Objects of the Regulations.
3. The objects of these Regulations shall be to—
(a) improve and stimulate the national economy by encouraging additional lending
to micro, small and medium enterprises, increasing investment opportunities for
micro, small and medium enterprises and strengthening skills and capacities of
proprietors of micro, small and medium enterprises;
(b) facilitate the financing of micro, small and medium enterprises by partially
guaranteeing credit advanced to the enterprises; and
(c) create a conducive business environment and promote partnerships between the
government and financial intermediaries with respect to credit guarantees for
micro, small and medium enterprises and other related activities.
PART II – CREDIT GUARANTEE SCHEME
Establishment of the Scheme.
4. There is established a Scheme to be known as the Credit Guarantee Scheme.
Funds of the Scheme.
5. The funds of the Scheme shall consist of-
(a) monies appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Scheme;
(b) income generated from the proceeds of the Scheme;
(c) income from investments made by the Administrator for the purposes of the
Scheme;
(d) grants, donations, bequests or other gifts made to the Administrator for the
purposes of the Scheme; and

-- 427 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 429
[Subsidiary]
(e) monies from any other source as may be approved by the Cabinet Secretary.
PART III – ADMINISTRATION OF THE SCHEME
Steering Committee.
6. (1) The Scheme shall be overseen by a committee to be known as the Steering
Committee which shall consist of—
(a) the Principal Secretary in the Ministry responsible for matters relating to finance,
who shall be the chairperson, or the Principal Secretary's representative;
(b) the Principal Secretary in the Ministry responsible for matters relating to micro,
small and medium enterprises or the Principal Secretary's representative;
(c) the Attorney-General or the Attorney-General's representative;
(d) the Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya or the Governor's representative; and
(e) three independent members, not being public officers, appointed by the Cabinet
Secretary for a period not exceeding three years, renewable once, who shall
comprise of—
(i) one person with experience in banking or finance;
(ii) one person with experience in insurance; and
(iii) one person with experience as an entrepreneur in a micro, small or medium
enterprise.
(2) A person shall be eligible for appointment as a member of the Steering Committee
under paragraph (1) (e) if that person—
(a) possesses a degree in a relevant field from a university recognised in Kenya; and
(b) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
Functions of the Steering Committee.
7. The Steering Committee shall—
(a) oversee the administration of the Scheme;
(b) advise the Cabinet Secretary generally on the administration of the Scheme;
(c) develop policy guidelines relating to guarantees by the Scheme;
(d) monitor the uptake of guarantees for credit facilities extended to micro, small and
medium enterprises and make recommendations for improvement thereof;
(e) review applications for participation in the Scheme from institutions and advise
the Cabinet Secretary on the suitability of the applicants to participate in the
Scheme;
(f) advise the Cabinet Secretary on the designation of other entities as participating
financial intermediaries;
(g) receive reports on the performance of the Scheme;
(h) review the criteria for the issuance of credit guarantees under the Scheme including
guarantee fees, maximum loan sizes, guarantee coverage rates and credit standards
defining eligible borrowers to be included in the scheme;
(i) monitor and evaluate the activities of the Scheme; and
(j) perform such other functions that, in the opinion of the Cabinet Secretary, shall
promote the objects of the Scheme.

-- 428 of 625 --

430 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Administrator of the Scheme.
8. (1) The Administrator of the Scheme shall be the Principal Secretary in the Ministry
responsible for matters relating to finance or a person designated by the Principal Secretary
in writing for that purpose.
(2) The Administrator shall —
(a) open and operate bank accounts for the purposes of the Scheme;
(b) supervise and control the administration of the Scheme;
(c) consult with the Steering Committee on matters relating to the administration of
the Scheme;
(d) determine the maximum amounts of guarantees that the Scheme may extend to a
participating financial intermediary;
(e) cause to be kept books of accounts and other books and records in relation to the
Scheme of all activities and undertakings financed and guaranteed by the Scheme;
(f) enter into and sign agreements with financial intermediaries for the purpose of
offering guarantees for part of the credit advanced to viable micro, small and
medium enterprises; and
(g) open an electronic ledger which shall contain the following details—
(i) the names of participating financial intermediaries; and
(ii) the names of micro, small and medium enterprises that participating
financial intermediaries have extended credit facilities indicating
enterprises whose owners or proprietors are women, persons with disability
and the youth;
Scheme Manager and staff.
9. (1) The day to day operations of the Scheme shall be undertaken by a Scheme Manager
and staff.
(2) The Scheme Manager and staff of the Scheme shall be appointed by the Cabinet
Secretary from among the officers of the Ministry responsible for matters relating to finance.
(3) Notwithstanding paragraph 2, the Cabinet Secretary may appoint any other person as
a member of staff of the Scheme if that person's knowledge and skills are found to be necessary
for the performance of the functions of the Scheme.
Eligible borrowers.
10. (1) An enterprise to which a credit facility has been extended shall be eligible for a
partial guarantee of the credit facility under the Scheme if that enterprise —
(a) is a micro, small or medium enterprise;
(b) is registered as a business or company under the relevant laws;
(c) is a registered taxpayer and is in compliance with the relevant tax laws;
(d) is registered by a county government and holds a valid business permit or trade
licence;
(e) is not part of any group or enterprise which would otherwise not be eligible for a
credit guarantee under these Regulations;

-- 429 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 431
[Subsidiary]
(f) intends to use the credit advanced for business purposes, including —
(i) working capital requirements of the enterprises;
(ii) acquisition of assets; or
(iii) rebuilding businesses affected by natural disasters or other financial crises;
(g) is credit-worthy;
(h) does business in Kenya; and
(i) satisfies any other condition that may be imposed by the Steering Committee
before the credit guarantee is granted.
(2) A guarantee for a credit facility under paragraph (1) shall be for a portion of the credit
facility.
Ineligible borrowers.
11. An enterprise shall not be eligible for a credit guarantee under the Scheme if —
(a) the credit facility relates to risks which are already covered by the Government, any
other credit guarantee, insurer or indemnity, to the extent so covered;
(b) the credit facility is inconsistent with any prudential guidelines issued by the
Central Bank of Kenya or under any other written law;
(c) the enterprise already enjoys a credit guarantee for another credit facility under
these Regulations and the lending institution has invoked the guarantee;
(d) the enterprise has been sanctioned by a financial intermediary against collateral
security or third-party guarantee;
(e) the enterprise is a financial intermediary or a state corporation;
(f) the enterprise is not a micro, small or medium enterprise; or
(g) the credit facility is intended for an unlawful purpose.
Eligible financial intermediaries.
12. (1) A financial intermediary shall be eligible to participate in the Scheme if the
financial intermediary —
(a) is an institution licensed by Central Bank of Kenya or any other institution as may
be designated by the Cabinet Secretary on the advice of the Steering Committee;
(b) has experience in extending and managing credit facilities to micro, small and
medium enterprises;
(c) commits to extend credit facilities to micro, small and medium enterprises which
shall be at least four times the amount that the Scheme will guarantee;
(d) has a wide geographical branch network or outreach;
(e) has a wide sectoral coverage in its portfolio of credit facilities that have been
extended to micro, small and medium enterprises; and
(f) has maintained a portfolio quality that is above a minimum level as may be
determined by the Steering Committee on credit facilities that have been extended
to micro, small and medium enterprises.
(2) The Scheme shall enter into a written agreement with each eligible financial
intermediary before the financial intermediary is allowed to participate in the Scheme which
shall specify how the financial intermediaries shall participate in the Scheme.

-- 430 of 625 --

432 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Applications by financial intermediaries.
13. (1) An eligible financial intermediary which wishes to participate in the Scheme shall
apply in writing to the Administrator.
(2) The application under paragraph (1) shall indicate the —
(a) minimum number of times of the guarantee value that the financial intermediary
expects to extend as credit to micro, small and medium enterprises;
(b) size of credit extended by the financial intermediary to micro, small and medium
enterprises both in total amount and as a proportion of total lending;
(c) performance of the credit facilities the financial intermediary has extended to
micro, small and medium enterprises, including the ratio of non-performing credit
facilities;
(d) sectors covered in the financial intermediary's micro, small and medium enterprise
borrowers;
(e) geographical distribution of the financial intermediary's branch network or
outreach; and
(f) any other relevant information that may be required by the Administrator.
(3) Before an eligible financial intermediary is allowed to participate in the Scheme, the
financial intermediary shall undertake in writing to submit to the Administrator reports on
the value of credit extended to micro, small and medium enterprises under these Regulations
in accordance with regulation 19.
Conditions for guarantee by the Scheme.
14. (1) A participating financial intermediary shall—
(a) evaluate applications for credit facilities by using prudent lending criteria;
(b) exercise business discretion and use due diligence in approving commercially
viable applications for credit facilities;
(c) conduct the account of the borrowers with normal banking prudence; and
(d) provide access to affordable credit facilities to micro, small and medium enterprises
on the basis of the partial guarantees committed under the Scheme.
(2) The participating financial intermediary shall not use more than one per cent of the
allocated portfolio on any single individual micro, small or medium enterprise.
(3) The participating financial intermediary shall use at least thirty per cent of guarantee
funds available on credit advanced to enterprises owned by women, youth and persons living
with disabilities.
(4) The participating financial intermediary shall —
(a) monitor the borrower account;
(b) provide basic business support to the borrower that the participating financial
intermediary provides its regular clients;
(c) safeguard the primary securities taken from the borrower in respect of the credit
facility in good and enforceable condition; and
(d) ensure that the guarantee claim in respect of the credit facility and borrower is
lodged with the Scheme in the form and manner specified by the Scheme.

-- 431 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 433
[Subsidiary]
(5) The participating financial intermediary shall —
(a) exercise all the necessary precautions and maintain its recourse to the borrower
for the entire amount of the credit facility owed to it and initiate such necessary
action for recovery of the outstanding amount, including such action as may be
recommended by the Steering Committee;
(b) comply with the directions of the Cabinet Secretary in facilitating recoveries of the
defaulted credit facility or safeguarding its interest as a guarantor;
(c) in respect of any defaulted account, exercise the same diligence in recovering the
amount in default, and safeguarding the interest of the Scheme in all the ways
open to it as it might have exercised in the normal course if no guarantee had been
furnished by the Scheme;
(d) refrain from any act or omission, either before or subsequent to invocation of the
guarantee, which may adversely affect the interest of the Scheme;
(e) ensure, through a stipulation in an agreement with the borrower, that it shall not
create any charge on the security held in the account covered by the guarantee for
the benefit of any account not covered by the guarantee, with itself or in favour of
any other creditor without advance written permission from the Cabinet Secretary;
and
(f) secure for the Scheme through a stipulation in an agreement with the micro, small
and medium enterprise the right to share the enterprise's details and any other
information provided by the borrower under these Regulations.
(6) Where a participating financial institution considers that the debt is more likely to be
recovered if the borrower is allowed to pay the debt over a period of time, it may enter into
an agreement with the borrower to pay the debt over that period and at such intervals, and
subject to such terms and conditions, as provided for by relevant laws relating to the extension
of credit facilities.
(7) A participating financial intermediary shall hold lien on assets created out of the credit
facility extended to the borrower, on its own behalf and on behalf of the Scheme.
Invoking a guarantee.
15. (1) A participating financial intermediary may invoke the guarantee in respect of a
credit facility if the following conditions are satisfied—
(a) the amount in default in respect of the credit facility has not been paid;
(b) the credit facility has been classified as non-performing in accordance with the
Central Bank of Kenya prudential guidelines;
(c) the guarantee in respect of the credit facility was in force at the time the facility
was classified as non-performing;
(d) the participating financial intermediary has not invoked any credit life insurance
with respect to the credit facility;
(e) a period of three months has elapsed from the date of the last disbursement of
the credit facility to the borrower without payment by the borrower or the date
of payment of the guarantee fee in respect of the credit facility by the borrower,
whichever is the later; and
(f) the credit facility has been recalled and recovery proceedings have been initiated.
(2) The claim for the guarantee shall be preferred by the financial intermediary in such
manner and within such time as may be specified by the Administrator.

-- 432 of 625 --

434 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) In this regulation, "amount in default" means the principal amount outstanding in the
borrower's account in respect of a credit facility as at —
(a) the date of the credit facility becoming non-performing;
(b) the date the claim is lodged; or
(c) such other reasonable date as may be specified by the Scheme for preferring
any claim against the guarantee which shall be subject to the maximum level
guaranteed, whichever is earlier.
(4) A claim under paragraph (1) shall be accompanied by the following details—
(a) the name of the micro, small or medium enterprise to which a credit facility was
extended;
(b) a certified copy of the certificate of registration or incorporation of the micro, small
or medium enterprise;
(c) demand letters by the participating financial intermediary to the micro, small or
medium enterprise;
(d) evidence that the credit facility was used for the intended purpose;
(e) the balance of the credit facility that is outstanding at the time of the default;
(f) a statement by the participating financial intermediary that all reasonable
collection efforts, excluding conclusion of litigation or other judicial processes for
the recovery of the credit facility, have been exhausted;
(g) a statement that the participating financial intermediary has classified the
outstanding credit amount as non-performing in accordance with the Central Bank
of Kenya prudential guidelines; and
(h) any other information or documents that the Administrator may require in order
to validate the claim.
(5) Once the Administrator has received all the documentation or information required to
validate a claim, the Administrator shall, within thirty days of receiving the documentation
or information—
(a) validate the authenticity of the claim; and
(b) notify the participating financial intermediary in writing of the approval or denial
of the claim.
Payment of claims.
16. (1) Where the Administrator approves the payment of a claim, the Scheme Manager
shall pay the participating financial intermediary—
(a) fifty per cent of the guaranteed amount within sixty days from the date the claim
was received by the Administrator; and
(b) fifty per cent of the guaranteed amount within fourteen days of receipt by the
Administrator of a notice of exhaustion of available remedies to recover the
principal amount outstanding from the borrower or within six months after the
claim was first lodged, whichever comes first.
(2) The payment of claims by the Scheme Manager to participating financial
intermediaries shall not take away the responsibility of the financial intermediaries to recover
the outstanding amounts of the credit facilities that are due from defaulting micro, small and
medium enterprises.

-- 433 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 435
[Subsidiary]
(3) Any money paid by the Scheme Manager on a guarantee shall be a debt due to the
national government from the micro, small or medium enterprise whose credit facility was
guaranteed and be recoverable as a debt due to the national government.
(4) Where the Scheme Manager has paid a claim, and thereafter the participating
financial intermediary recovers any funds owed by the micro, small or medium enterprise, the
participating financial intermediary shall, within ninety days from the date of the recovery,
reimburse the Scheme according to the risk-sharing ratio, after deducting any reasonable
expenses incurred in the recovery of the funds, but shall not deduct interest charged by
the participating financial intermediary on the outstanding amount that is higher than the
interest charged on the credit facility before the default.
Record of recovery costs.
17. The participating financial intermediary shall keep a record of all expenses incurred
in the recovery process.
Claim to be paid in sixty days.
18. The Scheme Manager shall pay each guarantee claim within sixty days from the date
the claim was lodged.
Reports by participating financial intermediaries.
19. (1) A participating financial intermediary shall submit to the Administrator at least
once in each month a report on the credit facilities for which guarantees have been issued
under these Regulations.
(2) The participating financial intermediary shall submit the report under paragraph (1)
within ten days after the end of the previous month.
(3) The report under paragraph (1) shall include information on —
(a) all credit facilities extended by the financial intermediary under the Scheme during
that period;
(b) the total value of the credit committed by the participating financial intermediary
under the Scheme during that period;
(c) all credit guarantees given to the participating financial intermediary which shall
be disaggregated into enterprises owned by women, youth and persons living with
disability whose credit facilities have been guaranteed;
(d) credit guarantees given to the participating financial intermediary disaggregated
into the number of micro, small and medium enterprises whose credit facilities
have been guaranteed and by county of operation; and
(e) any other relevant information required by the Scheme Administrator.
(4) Each participating financial intermediary shall submit at least once in each month a
list of all credit facilities issued under these Regulations during the previous month.
(5) The participating financial intermediary shall list each credit facility by the account
number and provide the—
(a) name of the micro, small or medium enterprise;
(b) micro, small or medium enterprise's county of business operations;
(c) value of the credit facility that has been guaranteed;
(d) interest rate charged on the credit facility;
(e) outstanding balance on the credit facility;

-- 434 of 625 --

436 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(f) date of approval of the credit facility;
(g) date of the first payment by the micro, small or medium enterprise;
(h) number of instalments to be paid by the micro, small or medium enterprise in the
repayment of the credit facility; and
(i) such other details as the Administrator may require.
(6) At least once in each month, each participating financial intermediary shall submit a
report to the Administrator of all credit facilities which are in default for thirty days or more
specifying the —
(a) name of the micro, small or medium enterprise;
(b) sector of the economy that the micro, small or medium enterprise is engaged in;
(c) value of the credit facility that was guaranteed;
(d) outstanding balance on the credit facility;
(e) value of the unpaid instalment of the credit facility;
(f) date of first unpaid instalment on the credit facility;
(g) number of days in delay in the repayment of the credit facility; and
(h) reasons for the non-repayment of the credit facility.
(7) The report under paragraph (6) shall describe the measures taken by the bank to carry
out collections and may reference the letters sent, follow-up notices, and warnings through
legal channels.
(8) The participating financial intermediary shall report on the status of any defaulted
credit facility for which the Scheme Manager has paid either partial or full coverage amounts.
(9) The participating financial intermediary shall report on each defaulted credit facility
until —
(a) the guarantee payment has been recovered by the financial intermediary from the
micro, small or medium enterprise; or
(b) the financial intermediary has fully provisioned for the credit facility in accordance
with the Central Bank of Kenya prudential guidelines.
(10) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this regulation, the participating financial
intermediary shall also report on the following matters in a manner and at intervals specified
by the Administrator —
(a) the number and values of rejected credit facilities, repaid credit facilities and a
projection of the credit facilities to be extended in the forthcoming period of three
months; and
(b) the impact of the credit facilities on micro, small and medium enterprises in the
manner specified by the Administrator.

-- 435 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 437
[Subsidiary]
Reports by the Scheme Manager.
20. The Scheme Manager shall prepare and submit to the Administrator regular reports
on the credit guarantees given under the Scheme including —
(a) financial and technical reports on guarantees made during the period including
information on —
(i) the products and sectors for which guarantees have been issued;
(ii) the number of beneficiary micro, small and medium enterprises;
(iii) the value of credit guaranteed;
(iv) the repayment periods; and
(v) the guarantees which have been liquidated;
(b) reports on repayments made on outstanding credit facilities and details of any
outstanding payments;
(c) reports on delinquent guarantees and the stage of recovery;
(d) reports on the size and quality of the guaranteed portfolio;
(e) reports on the liquidity position of the Scheme; and
(f) the risk assessment of the credit guarantees or classes of guarantees.
Cabinet Secretary may prescribe additional conditions.
21. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may impose additional conditions with respect to the
issuance of guarantees for credit facilities advanced to borrowers under these Regulations.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (I), such additional conditions may
include the —
(a) maximum size of the credit facilities that may be guaranteed under these
Regulations with respect to a credit facility or class of credit facilities;
(b) contributions by the financial intermediaries for purposes of expanding the
Scheme and contributing to job creation;
(c) extent of the liability of the Scheme to a participating financial intermediary if the
participating financial intermediary fails to comply with these Regulations;
(d) variation of the terms and conditions of an agreement if a participating financial
intermediary fails or refuses to comply with these Regulations;
(e) the documents, information and reports that the participating financial
intermediaries may be required to submit to the Scheme;
(f) manner of giving of information to the Scheme for the purposes of the making of
an agreement;
(g) requirements in relation to the transfer of any rights and liabilities under a credit
facility agreement; and
(h) such other matters as the Cabinet Secretary may consider necessary for the
purposes of the Scheme.

-- 436 of 625 --

438 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
PART IV – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Offences and penalties.
22. (1) A person who —
(a) wilfully applies any proceeds of a guaranteed credit facility to any purpose other
than the purpose for which the credit was approved;
(b) having obtained a guaranteed credit facility, wilfully destroys or misappropriates
any security given in relation to the guaranteed facility;
(c) knowingly gives false information; or
(d) wilfully destroys any asset used as a collateral by a participating financial
intermediary,
commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to the penalties specified in section
199 of the Act.
(2) Where an offence under this section is committed by a body corporate, every person
who at the time of the commission of the offence was-
(a) a director, general manager, secretary of the company or other similar officer of
the body corporate; or
(b) purporting to act in any such capacity as provided in paragraph (a),
also commits that offence and shall be liable on conviction to the penalties specified in
section 199 of the Act.

-- 437 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 439
[Subsidiary]
Waiver under section 77
THE COURT FEES WAIVER
[L.N. 59/2020]
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 77 of the Public Finance Management
Act (Cap. 412A) the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Planning waives court
fees in respect of commercial disputes where the value of the suit does not exceed one million
shillings, for a period of two years.

-- 438 of 625 --

440 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 205
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (COUNTY GOVERNMENTS) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Provision
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Application of the Regulations.
4. Object and Purpose of the Regulations.
5. Officers to be conversant with Regulations.
6. Openness and accountability.
7. County Executive Committee Member to publish process and procedures for
public participation.
8. Monetary unit, accounting and reporting currency.
9. Financial management forms and manuals.
10. Accounting Officer’s responsibility not diminished by audit.
11. Responsibility for handover by financial officers.
12. Application of secure signatures.
13. Signing blank or blind accountability documents.
14. Restricted use of green ink.
15. Restricted use of brown ink.
16. Signing blank or blind accountability documents.
PART II – CORPORATE MANAGEMENT
17. Corporate governance.
18. Establishment of Public Finance Management Standing Committee.
19. Roles and responsibilities of the standing committee.
20. Governor’s Warrants.
21. County Treasury warrant.
22. Responsibilities of Accounting Officers.
23. Delegation by the Accounting Officer.
24. Designation of Authority to Incur Expenditure by the Accounting Officer.
PART III – COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY
25. Fiscal responsibility principles.
26. County Fiscal Strategy Paper.
27. Contents of a fiscal framework.
28. Revision to the fiscal framework.
PART IV – BUDGET PREPARATION
29. Responsibility for preparing annual estimates of expenditure.
30. Budget preparation process.
31. Budget guidelines.
32. Determination of budget ceilings.
33. Audit of Budget Estimates.
34. Budget hearing processes.
35. Provisions in Appropriation Bills.

-- 439 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 441
[Subsidiary]
36. Vote on account.
37. Approval of the Annual Budget Estimates by the County Assembly.
38. Expenditure before approval of budget estimates by County Assembly.
39. Supplementary budgets estimates.
40. Budget classification and the standard chart of accounts.
PART V – BUDGET EXECUTION
41. General rules relating to budget Execution.
42. Accounting Officers to exercise budgetary control measures.
43. Accounting Officers to request cash on the basis of an approved quarterly cash
disbursement schedule.
44. Consolidation and approval of cash limits issued to accounting officers.
45. Release of funds to meet expenditure.
46. Budget Variation.
47. Budget reallocation.
48. Reallocation between programmes and sub-votes.
49. Advances from the County Emergency Fund.
50. Commitment for goods or services.
51. Vote Control Procedures.
52. Receipt of goods and services beyond the stipulated period.
53. Unauthorized spending.
54. Monthly reporting obligations by Accounting Officers.
55. Contracts with multi-year financial implications.
56. Reorganisation of government functions.
PART VI – MANAGEMENT OF REVENUE AND OTHER RECEIPTS
57. Classification of County Government Revenues.
58. Format of estimates of revenue.
59. Basic principles in deciding whether sums shall be applied as AIA.
60. Main forms of receipts in development estimates.
61. Receivers of revenue.
62. Collection of revenue.
63. Responsibility for revenue management.
64. In-year reporting of revenue collection.
65. Fees for services rendered by the county government.
66. Agency services and revenue management.
67. Refund of revenue.
68. Format of annual and quarterly statements submitted by the receivers of
revenue.
PART VII – MANAGEMENT OF GRANTS AND DONATIONS
69. Definition of terms.
70. Approval of Regulations under section 139 of the Act.
71. Grants, donations and sponsorships.
72. Grants administration.
73. Disclosure of authorization and disbursement.

-- 440 of 625 --

442 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING ON DONATIONS AND GRANTS
74. Monies received by way of grants and donations to be paid into a designated
account.
75. Project selection criteria.
76. Project bank account.
77. Records of receipts and disbursements.
78. Responsibilities of NGOs where the project is implemented by NGO.
79. Documents to be attached by NGOs where the project is implemented by NGO.
PART VIII – COUNTY TREASURY AND CASH MANAGEMENT
80. Composition of County Revenue Fund.
81. Process of receipts into County Revenue Fund.
CASH AND BANKING ARRANGEMENTS
82. Criteria for approval of opening and operating county government entities bank
accounts.
83. Guiding principles for cash management.
84. Surrender of End-of-Year Surplus Cash Balances.
85. Cheques and electronic payments.
86. Cash Management Advisory Committee.
87. Registers and records of county government bank accounts.
88. Authority to have access to county government bank accounts.
89. Security for cash in transit.
90. Reconciliation of bank accounts.
MANAGING IMPREST TRANSACTIONS
91. Nature of imprest.
92. Determination of imprest levels.
93. Classes of imprest.
94. Duties of Imprest Holders.
COUNTY TREASURY SINGLE ACCOUNT
95. Establishment of a County Treasury Single Account.
96. Operation of a Treasury Single Account.
PART IX – ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING
FORM AND BASIC STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS
97. Accounting period.
98. Charging of expenditure to year of accounts.
99. Account codes and standard chart of accounts.
100. Books of accounts to be kept by Accounting officers.
101. Recording and reporting basis.
102. Financial records and automation of financial operations.
103. Accounting adjustments journal.
104. Vouchers.
105. Powers to delegate voucher approval.
106. Deposit accounts.
107. Clearance and suspense accounts.

-- 441 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 443
[Subsidiary]
108. Payments to beneficiaries residing outside Kenya.
109. Use of electronic systems for financial operations.
110. Restricted access to systems.
PART X – EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT
111. County Revenue Fund Services.
112. Excess vote.
113. Payments to which an Accounting Officer objects.
114. Goods, works and services to be procured according to an approved
procurement plan.
115. Recovery, disallowance and adjustment of payments.
116. Re-Vote of Budget.
117. Accountable documents.
118. Preservation of accountable documents, books and records.
EXPENDITURE IN RELATION TO HUMAN RESOURCES
119. Expenditure in relation to human resources.
120. Payroll certification by accounting officer.
121. Deduction codes to be assigned to all payroll deductions.
122. Remuneration of members of committees and commissions of inquiry.
123. Services rendered by members during private time.
124. Compensation and ex-gratia payment.
BENEFITS AND ALLOWANCES OF PUBLIC OFFICERS
125. Authority for loans and advances.
126. Benefits and allowances for Public Officers.
LEASE FINANCING AND JOINT COUNTY INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS
127. Lease financing transactions by accounting officers of county governments.
128. Joint Infrastructure Investments.
PART XI – MONITORING AND REPORTING
129. Responsibility for monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
130. Footnotes to appropriation accounts.
131. Special county public funds and County corporations additional reporting
responsibilities.
PART XII – ASSET MANAGEMENT
132. Responsibility for assets management.
133. Responsibility for county government entity inventory.
134. Accounting Officers' responsibilities upon transfer of assets and liabilities.
135. Assets accruing to the county government by operation of law.
136. Register of assets.
137. Purchase and capacity of official vehicles for certain county government
officers.
LOSSES AND WRITE-OFFS
138. Definition.
139. Accounting officers responsibility for a county government entity.
140. Disclosure of offences.

-- 442 of 625 --

444 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
141. Procedure for handling losses.
142. Categories of losses.
143. Investigation of every case of loss.
144. Defective systems.
145. Financial liability of officers.
146. Annual statement of losses.
147. Clarifications on classification of losses.
148. Claims on damaged or incomplete goods.
149. Investigation of losses.
150. Writing off of losses.
151. Interest payable on recoverable losses.
152. Right of the Auditor-General.
PART XIII – INTERNAL AUDIT AND AUDIT COMMITTEES
153. Mandate of internal auditors.
154. Compliance with professional standards and code of ethics.
155. Independence of the internal auditor.
THE COUNTY HEAD OF INTERNAL AUDIT
SERVICES OF THE COUNTY TREASURY
156. Independence of County Head of Internal Audit services.
157. Functions of County Head of Internal Audit services.
158. The role of Accounting Officer in risk management.
159. Performance appraisal.
160. Reporting material breaches and persistent material breaches.
161. Prohibition from conducting assurance services.
162. Disciplinary liability on internal auditors.
INTERNAL AUDIT PLANNING, PERFORMANCE AND REPORTING
163. Risk based audit assessment strategic plan.
164. Communicating results.
IMPLEMENTATION OF AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS
165. Enforcement of Internal Audit recommendations.
166. Preparation and submission of quarterly and annual audit reports.
AUDIT COMMITTEES
167. Establishment of audit committees.
168. Duties of the audit committees.
169. Composition of audit committees.
170. Terms of appointment.
171. Vacancy of office.
FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
172. Meetings of the audit committee.
173. Code of conduct.
174. Remuneration and compensation.
175. Capacity building for audit committees.

-- 443 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 445
[Subsidiary]
PART XIV – PUBLIC DEBT MANAGEMENT
176. Guiding principles for county government borrowing.
177. Borrowing powers for county governments.
178. Borrowing Purposes.
179. County total public debt threshold.
180. Setting Debt Limit in the County Medium Term Debt Management Strategy.
181. Eligibility and evaluation criteria for guarantee requests by county government.
182. Criteria for issuance of county government securities.
183. Process of issuance of Treasury Bonds on behalf of county governments.
184. Process for applying for a national government guarantee for external
borrowing.
185. Use of moneys borrowed and credits obtained.
186. Objectives of county public debt management.
187. County government medium term debt management strategy.
188. Annual county government borrowing programme.
189. Formalization of agreements for loans.
190. Modes of payment (disbursement) of loan funds.
191. Credit purchases.
192. Redemption, conversion and consolidation of loans.
193. County government entities to provide data on debt.
194. County annual debt reporting.
195. Roles and responsibilities of accounting officers in debt management
operations and loan administration.
196. Default of payment of guaranteed loan.
PART XV – PUBLIC FUNDS
197. Criteria for the establishment of a county public fund.
198. Management and winding up of a county public fund.
199. Winding up of a county public Fund.
PART XVI – COUNTY CORPORATIONS
200. Definitions.
201. Declaration of County government entities and classification of state
corporation.
202. Guiding principles for the establishment of county corporations.
203. Criteria for establishing county corporations.
204. Dissolution of County corporations.
205. Annual budget.
206. Dividend policy and surplus funds.
207. Quarterly reporting by county corporations.
208. Annual financial statements.
PART XVII – COUNTY BUDGET AND ECONOMIC FORUM
209. The role of County Budget and Economic Forum.
PART XVIII – COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
210. Offences of financial misconduct.

-- 444 of 625 --

446 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
PART XIX – MISCELLANEOUS
211. Gazettement of financial accounting and reporting formats.
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM TO THE PUBLIC FINANCE
MANAGEMENT (COUNTY GOVERNMENT) REGULATIONS
PARAGRAPH 1.
SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
SUBPARAGRAPH (II)
SUBPARAGRAPH (III)
SUBPARAGRAPH (IV)
SUBPARAGRAPH (V)
PARAGRAPH 2.
SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
SUBPARAGRAPH (II)
SUBPARAGRAPH (III)
PARAGRAPH 3.
PARAGRAPH 4.
PARAGRAPH 5.
PARAGRAPH 6.
PARAGRAPH 7.

-- 445 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 447
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (COUNTY GOVERNMENTS) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 35/2015, L.N. 230/2015]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (County
Governments) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Act" means the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A);
"Accountant-General" means the officer of the National Treasury designated as the
Accountant-General;
"Accounting Standards Board" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"Accounting Unit" means organizational division in a government entity responsible for
accounting and financial services;
"appointing authority" means—
(a) in case of a county government entity which is a county ministry or department,
the accounting officer designated by the County Executive Committee Member for
finance as such; or
(b) in case of a county government entity which is a county corporation or any other
county government entity, the body mandated by enabling instrument to manage
that county government entity;
"Appropriation-in-Aid" means any revenue which a county government entity receives and
is approved by Parliament for application by that entity to finance its activities;
"Appropriation Act" has the meaning as assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"budget ceilings" means the maximum amount that the county government allocates in a
given year to target sector or expenditure category;
"Budget Circular" means a written instruction issued by the Cabinet Secretary providing
broad guidelines on the budget process of the national government or means written
instruction issued by the County Executive Committee Member for Finance providing broad
guidelines on the budget process of the county government;
"benefit deduction" means a deduction on a payroll system against an official's salary for
a debt arising from employment benefits;
"basic salary" means an officer's salary excluding allowances;
"Cabinet Secretary" means the Cabinet Secretary, for the time being responsible for
matters relating to the National Treasury;
"Cash flow statement" means a financial statement that shows planned inflow and outflow
of resources over a period covering the financial year in line with the activity level;
"chief officer" has the same meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"collector of revenue" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"collective agreement deduction" means a deduction on a government payroll system
against an official's salary arising from a collective agreement between the government and a
union and is registered in accordance with applicable law;
"Contingencies Fund" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;

-- 446 of 625 --

448 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
"Corporate governance" is the process and structure used to direct and manage business
affairs of the county government entities towards enhancing prosperity and good governance
with the ultimate objective of realizing national long-term value while taking into account
the interest of all stakeholders;
"County Allocation of Revenue Bill" means the Bill annually introduced into Parliament
and enacted under Article 218(b) of the Constitution;
"county corporation" has the same meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"County Emergencies Fund" has the same meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the
Act;
"County Executive Committee" has the same meaning assigned to it in the County
Government Act;
"County Executive Committee Member" has the same meaning assigned to it under section
2 of the Act;
"county government entity" has the same meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the
Act;
"County Public Debt" has the same meaning as assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"County Revenue Fund Services" means a service the expense of which is charged directly
against and payable from the County Revenue Fund under or by virtue
of an Act of Parliament or any Act of County Assembly, other than an Appropriation Act;
"debt" means an amount of money owed and already payable by an official to any person
and for the purposes of these Regulations, includes insurance premiums deducted in terms of
policies with long and short-term insurers;
"deduction code" means a code issued by the Accountant- General to enable a person to
deduct money from an individual paid via the government payroll system;
"discretionary deduction" means a deduction on the government payroll system against
an official's salary, other than benefit, collective agreement, state or statutory deductions;
"disposal" in relation to a capital asset, includes—
(a) the demolition, dismantling or destruction of the capital asset; or
(b) any other process applied to a capital asset which results in loss of ownership of
the capital asset otherwise than by way of transfer of ownership;
"Division of Revenue Bill" means the Bill annually introduced into Parliament and enacted
under Article 218(a) of the Constitution;
"donation" has the meaning assigned to it under section 138 of the Act;
"economy" means minimizing the cost of resources used or required to achieve priority
objectives;
"effectiveness" means the extent to which a programme intervention has attained, or is
expected to attain, its objectives efficiently in a sustainable manner;
"efficiency" means a measure of how economically resources or inputs (including fund,
expertise and time) are converted to results;
"estimates of expenditure" means—
(a) estimates of expenditure based on programmes and sub-programmes prepared on
a three fiscal year rolling basis, specifying the resources to be allocated and the
outcomes to be achieved and outputs to be delivered, the estimates for the first

-- 447 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 449
[Subsidiary]
year of every such period of three fiscal years requiring appropriation by the County
Assembly; or
(b) supplementary estimates of expenditure appropriated by the County Assembly;
"fair market value" in relation to a capital asset, means the value at which a knowledgeable
willing buyer would buy and a knowledgeable willing seller would sell the capital asset in an
arm's length transaction;
"financial statements" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;
"governing body" means a body of persons managing a public entity and includes a
commission, a board of trustees, a board of directors and a management board;
"grant" has the meaning assigned to it under sections 47 and 138 of the Act;
"grant recipient" has the meaning assigned to it under sections 47 and 138 of the Act;
"intended beneficiaries" has the meaning assigned to it under section 47 and 138 of the
Act;
"internal control" means a set of systems to ensure that financial and other records
are accurate, reliable, complete and ensure adherence to the management policies of the
Ministry, department or other agency of Government, for the orderly and efficient conduct of
the Ministry, department or agency, and the proper recording and safeguarding of its assets
and resources;
"irregular expenditure" means expenditure, other than unauthorised expenditure,
incurred in contravention of or that is not in accordance with a requirement of any relevant
legislation, including—
(a) the Act;
(b) these Regulations;
(c) the Public Procurement Act, 2005, or any Regulations made in accordance with that
Act; or
(d) any county legislation providing for procurement procedures in that county
government; and
(e) any other Act of Parliament legislation of that county government;
"medium term" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"national government entity" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"Principal Secretary" has the meaning assigned to under section 2 of the Act;
"public debt" has the meaning assigned to it under Article 214(2) of the Constitution;
"public money" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"public officer" has the meaning assigned to it in under Article 260 of the Constitution;
"programme" means a group of independent, but closely-related, activities designed to
achieve a common outcome;
"receiver of revenue" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"regulatory agency" means a national government entity established by an Act of
Parliament to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Act that established it;

-- 448 of 625 --

450 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
"revenue" has the meaning assigned to it under the Commission on Revenue Allocation
Act (Cap. 428);
"revised estimates" refers to the supplementary budget estimates and approved budget
reallocations prepared and submitted under section 43 of the Act;
"spending unit" refers to a government component for which appropriation is allocated
within the budget and which is authorized to spend;
"sinking fund" means an account or pot of money or securities set aside to pay for a bond,
repurchase or early redemption of Treasury Bonds;
"standing committee" means the Public Finance Management Standing Committee
established under regulation 18 of these Regulations;
"statutory appropriation" means the authority to spend money allocated to the executive
in accordance with the purposes specified in the Constitution or an Act of Parliament;
"statutory deduction" means a deduction on government payroll system against a public
officer's salary, which is required or permitted by a law, court order or arbitration award;
"subscription statement" is a statement showing the investor's holdings as registered on
the Central Depository Securities (CDS) Register at the Central Bank of Kenya;
"supplementary budget estimates" means additional request of funds by the county
government to County Assembly;
"third party" has the meaning assigned to it under section 47 and 138 of the Act;
"unutilized balances" means any amounts withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund and
Appropriation-in-Aid collections for purposes of provision of basic services under an
Appropriations Act and not expended at the end of the financial year;
"unathourised expenditure" means—
(a) overspending of a vote or programme within a vote; or
(b) expenditure not in accordance with the purpose of a vote or, in the case of a
programme, not in accordance with the purpose of the programme;
"value for money" means the economic, efficient and effective utilization of resources;
"vote"has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"vote-on-account" means a special provision by which the county government obtains the
authority of the County Assembly for a sum sufficient to incur expenditure on various items
for a part of the year, pending the consideration and approval of budget estimates for that
year; and
"wasteful expenditure" has the meaning assigned to under section 2 of the Act.
[L.N. 230/2015, r. 3.]
Application of the Regulations.
3. These Regulations shall apply to—
(a) county governments;
(b) county government entities;
(c) County Public funds established under section 116 of the Act; and
(d) any other person performing any act or doing such thing that is provided for under
the Act.

-- 449 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 451
[Subsidiary]
Object and Purpose of the Regulations.
4. The object and purpose of these Regulations is—
(a) to provide means of administering of the powers vested in Cabinet Secretary under
the Constitution, the Act and any other related legislation;
(b) to provide means of administering the powers vested in the County Executive
Committee Member under the Act, and any other related legislation;
(c) to harmonize and standardize their application throughout the county
governments with a view controlling and managing the finances;
(d) to set out a standardized financial management system for use in county
government which is capable of producing accurate and reliable accounts free from
errors, fraud and which will be useful in management decisions and statutory
reporting;
(e) to provide for the conduct of fiscal relations between the national and county
governments; and
(f) to ensure accountability, transparency and the effective, economic and efficient
collection and utilization of public resources.
Officers to be conversant with Regulations.
5. The Accounting Officers shall ensure that all public officers under their control have
access to copies of these Regulations and the public officers shall ensure they are fully
conversant with the contents of the Regulations.
Openness and accountability.
6. (1) Subject to national security considerations, the public shall be provided with full
access to financial information in a timely manner for purposes of seeking public input by—
(a) establishing a focal point to facilitate access to financial information; or
(b) making information available in the media or;
(c) presenting information in the national language in summarised and user-friendly
forms; or
(d) making financial information available on websites that allow for information to
be downloaded.
(2) The County Treasuries shall arrange for effective public participation during the
development of their annual budget estimates including the publication of citizens' budgets
which shall explain and summarize the budget proposals.
(3) The dates for the sectoral forums and the venues shall be publicly announced one week
in advance, and an annual calendar of events released at the start of the financial year.
County Executive Committee Member to publish process and procedures for public
participation.
7. (1) For purposes of public participation in the planning and budgeting process,
there shall be participatory structures and processes that shall encompass abroad range of
strategies including—
(a) open forums, written submissions, online platform and media;
(b) specification of venues of public participation; and
(c) dates of public participation.

-- 450 of 625 --

452 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The County Executive Committee Member shall notify the general public through a
notice in the gazette or at least two newspapers of county wide circulation on the venue or
manner of submitting written submissions.
(3) The documents submitted to County Assembly and any other published documents
shall be published and publicized within 7 days of presentation.
(4) The County Executive Committee Member shall give a responsibility statement
confirming the extent to which general public was consulted particularly on the County
Strategy Paper and Sector Working Groups.
Monetary unit, accounting and reporting currency.
8. (1) The Kenyan shilling shall be the unit of account for drawing up and implementing
the county budgets, presenting and reporting accounts.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1), certain operations may be carried out
in international currencies subject to conditions laid down in these Regulations or other
financial instruments.
Financial management forms and manuals.
9. (1) County Treasury shall Publish financial manuals and forms which may be used by
county government entities to support implementation of these Regulations.
(2) The financial manuals and forms, issued in accordance with these Regulations shall
facilitate adoption of international standards and emerging best practices.
(3) The publications under paragraph (1) shall be made with the approval of the County
Executive Committee Member.
(4) The financial manuals shall contain relevant procedures for the budget preparation,
budget execution, keeping of books of accounts, formats of financial statements and
Government standard chart of accounts issued by the National Treasury.
Accounting Officer’s responsibility not diminished by audit.
10. The responsibilities of internal and external auditors exercised in accordance with
the Constitution, the Act and other legislation shall not diminish the Accounting Officers’
responsibility to maintain financial discipline as required by the Act and these Regulations.
Responsibility for handover by financial officers.
11. The accountability of a public officer vacating an office shall not be completed until
the financial and accounting records kept by him or her have been property handed over in
writing to an officer taking over his duties and attested by their supervisor:
Provided that this does not preclude the public officer from handing over any other
documents required under any other law or government Policy.
Application of secure signatures.
12. (1) Any county public officer signing any document or record pertaining to a financial
transaction shall ensure that the signature is given in such a manner so as to preclude
subsequent alteration or addition to the information contained in such document or record.
(2) The signature of any county public officer shall mot he binding on an Accounting
Officer or a public officer performing a financial function unless a specimen of the signature
is duly communicated in advance to the relevant county public officer or any other person
performing a financial function.

-- 451 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 453
[Subsidiary]
(3) If a county public officer no longer occupies a public office, the Accounting Officer shall
nullify that officer's specimen signature and communicate the same to all relevant county
public officers or any other person performing a financial function within a reasonable time.
Signing blank or blind accountability documents.
13. (1) In no circumstances shall a county public officer sign a blank or incomplete cheque,
record or other document, pertaining to a financial transaction.
(2) It is the duty of any county public officer signing any document or record pertaining
to a financial transaction to read and satisfy himself or herself that it is proper to give his or
her signature and his or her signature shall be evidence of acceptance of responsibility for the
document, whether the public officer read it or not.
(3) The signing of a document contrary to paragraphs (1) and (2) shall constitute an
offence under the Act.
Restricted use of green ink.
14. No county public officer except the Governor shall use green ink or green pencil in
recording or transacting any official financial transaction.
Restricted use of brown ink.
15. No county public officer other than the County Executive Committee Member, the
County Assembly Clerk, the Chief Officer, the County Head of Internal Audit Services or Head
of Internal Audit shall use brown ink or brown pencil in recording or transacting any official
financial transaction.
[L.N. 230/2015, r. 4.]
Signing blank or blind accountability documents.
16. (1) Financial records and documents shall be written in indelible ink.
(2) An entry in a financial record or document shall nor he obliterated, erased or altered
by being written over.
(3) Payment in connection with any document hearing an alteration, obliteration
or erasure shall be refused by the relevant public officer or any other person unless
countersigned, but this shall not apply to a cheque and official receipt.
(4) A person who contravenes paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) commits an offence under the Act.
PART II – CORPORATE MANAGEMENT
Corporate governance.
17. (1) Every county government entity to which the Act and these Regulations apply
shall include in their annual financial report as provided in section 164 of the Act, a statement
by each entity's Accounting Officer on compliance of the entity with these Regulations under
this part
(2) Where the entity is not fully compliant with these Regulations, the Accounting Officer
of that entity shall identify the reasons for non-compliance and indicate the steps being taken
to become compliant.
(3) The statements made in the report under this regulation shall be submitted to the
County Executive Committee Member.

-- 452 of 625 --

454 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Establishment of Public Finance Management Standing Committee.
18. (1) There is established in every county government entity a public finance
management standing committee to provide strategic guidance to the entity on public finance
management matters.
(2) Each standing committee shall comprise of the following—
(a) the Accounting Officer as chairperson of the committee;
(b) an officer designated by the accounting officer as secretary of the committee and
who shall be either the head of the finance or accounts units or head of both finance
and accounts units of the entity; and
(c) heads of departments or administrative units dealing with public finance
management matters.
(3) The Standing Committee shall meet as often as is necessary, but at least once every
quarter so as to coordinate management of public finance for entities and shall be accountable
to the County Executive Committee Member responsible for the entity or in case of County
Assembly, to the Speaker.
(4) The Standing Committee may establish sub-committees for the better carrying out of
its roles and responsibilities under this regulation.
Roles and responsibilities of the standing committee.
19. (1) The Standing Committee shall generally be responsible for the following—
(a) ensuring that there is prioritization on resources allocated to a county government
entity for the smooth implementation of the entities mission, strategy, goals, risk
policy plans and objectives;
(b) regularly review, monitor budget implementation and advice on the entities
accounts, major capital expenditures and review performance and strategies at
least on a quarterly basis;
(c) identifying risks and implementation of appropriate measures to manage such
risks or anticipated changes impacting on the entity;
(d) review on a regular basis the adequacy and integrity of the entity's internal control,
acquisition and divestitures and management information systems including
compliance with applicable laws, Regulations, Rules and guidelines;
(e) establish and implement a system that provides necessary information to the
stakeholders including stakeholder communication policy for the entity in line
with Article 35 of the Constitution;
(f) monitor the effectiveness of the corporate governance practices under which the
entity operates and propose revisions as may be required from time to time;
(g) monitoring timely resolution of audit issues; and
(h) any other matter referred to it from time to time by the responsible County
Executive Committee Member or in the case of County Assembly, the Speaker.
(2) The Standing Committee shall submit a quarterly report of its work including any
recommendations to the responsible County Executive Committee Member or in case of
County Assembly, to the Speaker.
Governor’s Warrants.
20. (1) Once the Annual County Appropriation Bill or County Supplementary Bill(s) have
been assented to, the County Executive Committee Member shall obtain Governor's warrants

-- 453 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 455
[Subsidiary]
authorizing issues from the County Revenue Fund in accordance with the respective County
Appropriation legislation.
(2) The Governor's warrants in paragraph (1) shall then be transmitted to the Controller of
Budget by the County Executive Committee Member to authorize withdrawals in accordance
with Article 228 of the Constitution.
County Treasury warrant.
21. On receipt of the Governor's warrants, the County Executive Committee Member
shall issue a County Treasury warrant granting authority to Accounting Officers to incur
expenditure for the year in respect of their votes.
Responsibilities of Accounting Officers.
22. (1) Accounting Officers shall in accordance with Article of 226(2) of the Constitution
and section 149 (1) of the Act, be accountable to the County Assembly—
(a) for ensuring the most effective means of achieving desired program outcomes are
used;
(b) for maintaining effective systems of internal Control and the measures taken to
ensure that they are effective; and
(c) for measures taken to prepare the financial reports that reflect a true and fair
financial position of the entity.
(2) In addition to the responsibilities of Accounting Officers provided in the Act, an
Accounting Officer designated under the Act or any other Act, shall—
(a) comply with any tax, levy, duty, pension, commitments and audit commitments as
may be provided for by legislation;
(b) if he or she reasonably believes that an unauthorized, or irregular expenditure
has occurred, he or she shall immediately report, in writing, particulars of the
expenditure to the relevant authority with a copy to the County Treasury; or
(c) before transferring any funds to an entity within or outside the county government,
ensure that there is a written assurance from the entity that that entity implements
effective, efficient and transparent financial management and internal control
systems, or, if such written assurance is not or cannot be given, render the transfer
of the funds subject to conditions and remedial measures requiring the entity to
establish and implement effective, efficient and transparent financial management
and internal control systems;
(d) enforce compliance with any prescribed conditions if the county government entity
gives financial assistance to any other county government entity or person in
accordance with the law;
(e) take into account all relevant financial considerations, including issues of
propriety, regularity and value for money, when policy proposals affecting the
Accounting Officer's responsibilities are considered, and when necessary, bring
those considerations to the attention of the relevant authority;
(f) promptly consult and seek the prior views of the County Treasury on economic
viability and financial implications on any new county government entity which
a county department intends to establish or in the establishment of which it took
the initiative;
(g) not commit county government entity to any liability for which money has not been
appropriated provided that expenditure for projects or programs implemented
beyond one financial year is provided for in the subsequent financial years; and

-- 454 of 625 --

456 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(h) comply, and ensure compliance by county government entities with the provisions
of the Act and these Regulations.
Delegation by the Accounting Officer.
23. (1) The Accounting Officer of a county government entity may delegate to a public
officer, in writing, any of the Accounting Officer's powers or functions under the Act or these
Regulations.
(2) In exercising powers and functions under a delegation, the public officer shall comply
with any lawful directions of the Accounting Officer.
(3) The delegation in this regulation may include the authority to incur expenditure in
accordance with any limits prescribed by the Accounting Officer.
(4) Delegation of power does not take away the responsibility of the accountability from
the Accounting Officer.
Designation of Authority to Incur Expenditure by the Accounting Officer.
24. (1) An accounting officer may authorize a public officer Designation of under their
county government entity to be an Authority to Incur Authority to Incur Expenses (AIE)
Holder.
(2) An accounting officer who finds it necessary to authorize a public officer in another
county government entity or a national government entity to incur official expenditure on
his or her behalf, should do so by issuing an Authority to Incur Expenditure addressed to the
Accounting Officer of the county government entity or national government entity.
(3) The designation of AIE Holder shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the National
Treasury.
(4) An accounting officer shall maintain a register of all AIE Holders designated under
this Act.
(5) Where an accounting officer delegates this authority, the accounting officer shall
remain responsible for any expenditure incurred as a result of that delegation.
PART III – COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY
Fiscal responsibility principles.
25. (1) In addition to the fiscal responsibility principles set out in section 107 of the
Act, the following fiscal responsibility principles shall apply in the management of public
finances—
(a) the County Executive Committee Member with the approval of the County
Assembly shall set a limit on the county government's expenditure on wages and
benefits for its public officers pursuant to section 107(2) of the Act;
(b) the limit set under paragraph (a) above, shall not exceed thirty five (35) percent of
the county government's total revenue;
(c) for the avoidance of doubt, the revenue referred to in paragraph (b) shall not
include revenues that accrue from extractive natural resources including as oil and
coal;
(d) the county public debt shall never exceed twenty (20%) percent of the county
governments total revenue at any one time;
(e) the county annual fiscal primary balance shall be consistent with the debt target
in paragraph (d);

-- 455 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 457
[Subsidiary]
(f) the approved expenditures of a county assembly shall not exceed seven per cent of
the total revenues of the county government or twice the personnel emoluments
of that county assembly, whichever is lower;
(g) pursuant to section 107(5) of the Act, if the county government actual expenditure
on development shall be at least thirty percent in conformity with the requirement
under section 107(2)(a) of the Act;
(h) if the county government does not achieve the requirement of regulation 25(1)(f)
above at the end of the financial year, the county executive committee member
for finance shall submit a responsibility statement to county assembly explaining
the reasons for the deviation and provide a plan on how to ensure annual actual
expenditure outturns as well as medium term allocation comply with the provisions
of Section 107 (2) (a) of the Act and these regulations in the subsequent years; and
(i) the compliance plan above shall be binding and the county executive committee
member for finance shall ensure implementation.
(2) In line with prudent management of risks envisioned in section 107(2)(f) of the Act,
the County Executive Committee Member shall in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper include a
statement of fiscal risks outlining the potential policy decisions and key areas of uncertainty
that may have a material effect on the fiscal outlook and the statement shall include—
(a) potential policy decisions affecting revenue, tax payer behavioural responses
and court decisions that are likely to affect revenue bases and overall tax and
revenue collections and government income, including tax concessions ('r’ tax
expenditures), increase in tax rates, tax minimisation and avoidance by tax and
rates payers;
(b) potential policy decisions that could increase or decrease expenses depending on
decisions taken, and which constitute risks to the fiscal forecasts only to the extent
that they cannot be managed within existing baselines or budget allowances;
(c) potential capital decisions that are risks to the fiscal forecasts only to the extent
that they cannot be managed within existing county government balance sheet;
(d) matters dependent on external factors such as the outcome of negotiations or
international obligations; and
(e) a list of contingent liability including debt guarantees.
(3) The County Executive Committee Member shall disclose the specific fiscal risks if—
(a) their impact in his or her view is significant enough;
(b) a decision has not yet been taken but it is reasonably possible (but not probable)
that the matter will be approved or the situation will occur;
(c) it is reasonably probable that the matter will be approved or the situation will occur,
but the matter cannot be quantified or assigned to particular years with reasonable
certainty; and
(d) any other matters, the County Treasury considers, using their best professional
judgement, that the matters may have a material effect on the fiscal and economic
outlook, but are not certain enough to include in the fiscal forecasts.

-- 456 of 625 --

458 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
County Fiscal Strategy Paper.
26. (1) For the avoidance of doubt, the County Fiscal Strategy Paper submitted under
section 117 of the Act, shall contain an assessment of the current state of the county economic
environment which may include—
(a) the medium term macroeconomic framework and its outlook as contained in the
Budget Policy Statement and how it impacts on the county economic environment;
(b) a medium-term fiscal framework defining a top-down aggregate resource envelope
and broad expenditure levels;
(c) indicative allocation of available resources among county government entities;
(d) the economic assumptions underlying the county budgetary and fiscal policy over
the medium term; and
(e) a statement of fiscal responsibility principles, as specified in the Act and these
Regulations indicating whether the fiscal strategy adheres to these principles.
(2) In addition, county fiscal strategy paper shall contain a fiscal risk statement as
provided for under regulation 25.
(3) Before tabling a report containing recommendations on the County Fiscal Strategy
Paper for adoption by the County Assembly in accordance with section 117(6) of the Act, the
relevant committee of the County Assembly shall seek the views of the County Executive
Committee member on its recommendations.
(4) Once the County Fiscal Strategy Paper is adopted by the County Assembly it shall serve
as the basis of expenditure ceilings specified in the fiscal framework.
(5) The County Executive Committee member shall submit a copy of the adopted County
Fiscal Strategy Paper to the National Treasury.
(6) The ceiling for the development expenditure and personnel spending of the county
government budget shall be approved by the County Assembly and be binding for the next
two budget years.
(7) The County Treasury shall include a statement explaining any deviation to the
provisions of paragraph (4) of this regulation.
Contents of a fiscal framework.
27. (1) The fiscal framework in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper shall contain—
(a) updated forecasts expressed in Kenya shillings for the current budget year and
three further years and actual results for the previous budget years for the
consolidated county government budgets for—
(i) level of budgetary revenues by classification of the main categories of
revenues;
(ii) level of budgetary expenditures by economic and functional classifications;
(iii) capital expenditures;
(iv) the overall balance and primary balance position;
(v) level of county public debt;
(vi) sensitivity analysis taking account of possible changes in macroeconomic
and other conditions; and
(vii) any other information the County Executive Committee Member
determines is material to fiscal strategy;

-- 457 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 459
[Subsidiary]
(b) an explanation of the fiscal policies in relation to fiscal responsibility principles,
and any temporary measures to be implemented to ensure compliance, if
necessary;
(c) an analysis and explanation of—
(i) revenue policy, including planned changes to taxes and policies affecting
other revenues;
(ii) deficit and debt policy, including an analysis of county debt sustainability;
and
(iii) expenditure policy including expenditure priorities, aggregate expenditure
intentions, including the county consolidated budgets, and expenditure
ceilings and other targets of limits implied by or required by the fiscal
responsibility principles; and
(d) an analysis of the consistency of the updated fiscal strategies with the previous
fiscal strategies, providing all explanation of any significant changes.
(2) The County Executive Committee Member shall gazette effective dates and give
general guidelines and formats for preparing a consolidated county government accounts for
statistical purposes.
(3) The guidelines and formats under paragraph (2) shall be in conformity with the ones
issued by the Cabinet Secretary.
Revision to the fiscal framework.
28. The fiscal framework in regulation 27, may be revised as a result of—
(a) a significant and unexpected change in county macroeconomic indicators and
assumptions;
(b) policy changes arising from change of government.
PART IV – BUDGET PREPARATION
Responsibility for preparing annual estimates of expenditure.
29. (1) The accounting officer shall ensure that the draft estimates relating to her or his
department are prepared in conformity with the Constitution, the Act and these Regulations.
(2) The accounting officer is responsible, in particular for ensuring that—
(a) all services which can be reasonably foreseen are included in the estimates and
that they are within the capacity of her or his county government entity during the
financial year;
(b) the estimates have been prepared are complete and accurate as possible;
(c) the estimates have been framed with regard to economy and efficiency;
(d) the requisite authority has been obtained, where necessary, before provision is
made in the estimates; and
(e) the estimates are submitted to the County Treasury in the manner and format to
be gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary.
Budget preparation process.
30. (1) The budget preparation process for the following financial year (N+1) shall start
not later than the 30th August of the current financial year (N) with the issuance of the annual
budget circular by the County Executive Committee Member and in compliance with formats

-- 458 of 625 --

460 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
and recommendations contained in the annual budget preparation circular or guidelines,
instructions and the financial manual—
(a) on the basis of budget sector ceilings contained in the County Budget Review and
Outlook Paper (C-BROP), the budget sector working groups shall submit by January
of each year (N) the sector reports to the County Treasury which shall include
printed estimates for the current year (N) and for the forthcoming financial year (N
+1) and two outer years on a rolling basis (N+2), (N+3);
(b) the estimates for the sector referred to in paragraph (a) shall be consistent with
regulation (27); and
(c) budget proposals shall be submitted in the prescribed formats that support
program-based budgeting and classification of expenditure in economic classes.
(2) All budget Proposals shall be supported by the county government entity strategic
plan.
(3) The preparation and submission of estimates shall be done exclusively through
prescribed automated integrated financial management systems.
(4) The proposed sector ceilings for the next three financial years contained in C-BROP,
may be firmed up or readjusted in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper submitted in February
of financial year (N) and adopted by County Assembly by the 15th March of same financial
year (N).
(5) The approved County Fiscal Strategy Paper shall be published on the County Treasury
website.
(6) County government entities, or agencies when required, shall readjust their estimates
following the approval of the County Fiscal Strategy Paper and finalize and submit their
estimates for years (N+1), (N+2) and (N+3) by the 10th April of financial year (N) to the County
Executive Committee Member.
(7) Budget estimates shall be reviewed and consolidated and the draft budget estimates
submitted to County Executive Committee by April the 20th of the financial year (N).
(8) Budget estimates of county government entities shall be reviewed and consolidated
and the annual budget estimates submitted to the County Assembly, by April the 30th of
financial year (N).
Budget guidelines.
31. Unless provided otherwise in the Act, these Regulations or any other guidelines
developed in furtherance of the Act or these Regulations, the following guidelines shall be
observed at all times during budget formulation and approval—
(a) all revenue and expenditure shall be entered into the county government budget
estimates;
(b) expenditure entered in county government budget estimates shall be authorised
for one financial year only;
(c) budget revenue and expenditure appropriations shall be balanced;
(d) the Kenyan Shillings shall be the unit of account for drawing up and
implementation of the county government budgets, as well as the presentation of
those accounts;

-- 459 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 461
[Subsidiary]
(e) total budget revenue shall cover total budget expenditure and therefore—
(i) except as provided by legislation, there shall be no use of specific revenue
to finance specific expenditure; and
(ii) appropriation shall be for a specific purpose or a specific programme or item
of expenditure; and
(f) budget estimates, shall take into account expenditure priorities, which contributes
to the realization of the required output and desired policy outcome.
Determination of budget ceilings.
32. The budget ceiling contained in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper shall take into
account—
(a) the aggregate resource envelope following the forecast of major revenue (including
the equitable share) and expenditure categories (the latter according to both,
economic and administrative classification);
(b) the non-discretionary expenditure (debt service, wages and other related items);
(c) the overall expenditure taking into consideration the fiscal rules;
(d) breakdown of the overall expenditure into recurrent and development expenditure
by sector ceilings; and
(e) expenditure priorities as set out in county government policies.
Audit of Budget Estimates.
33. (1) Each Accounting Officer may cause any proposed budget estimates to be examined
and reported on by the internal audit unit of that county government entity.
(2) The Accounting Officer in paragraph (1) shall take into account any recommendations
made in respect thereto before submitting estimates to the County Treasury.
(3) A person who fails under paragraph (1) to provide information, or submits information
which that person knows to be misleading or incorrect shall have committed an offence under
the Act.
Budget hearing processes.
34. (1) On receipt of estimates from Accounting Officers, the County Executive Committee
Member shall cause to be conducted budget hearings to review strategic plans and estimates
of the entities concerned in order to ensure that these plans and estimates are in accordance
with the county economic policy and fiscal framework.
(2) Where the budget hearings in paragraph (1) necessitates changes, the County
Executive Committee Member may require an Accounting Officer to make adjustments to his
or her estimates.
Provisions in Appropriation Bills.
35. County Appropriation Bills shall provide for—
(a) the Votes and programs of the financial year;
(b) financial provision in respect of certain activities of the county governments during
that financial year; and
(c) enabling the withdrawal out of the County Revenue Fund, or any other county
public fund.

-- 460 of 625 --

462 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Vote on account.
36. (1) Where the County Appropriation Act is not assented to or is not likely to be
assented to before the first working day of the financial year, the Speaker to the County
Assembly, with approval of County Assembly, shall communicate to the County Executive
Committee Member grant of authority to withdraw from the County Revenue Fund of monies
of an amount not exceeding one-half of the amount included in the estimates in accordance
with section 134 of the Act.
(2) Accounting officers shall make necessary entries in their books in respect of the
amount of the vote on account approved.
(3) Moneys withdrawn under paragraph (1) shall be for the purpose of meeting
expenditure on the county government's programmes and activities in respect of the financial
year—
(a) up to fifty (50%) percent of the estimates of budget for the financial year submitted
to the County Assembly; or
(b) until such a time the Appropriation Act is assented to, whichever is earlier.
(4) Funds withdrawn from the County Revenue Fund under this regulation may be utilized
only for services for which funds have been provided for in the budget estimates submitted
to County Assembly.
(5) The funds provided for in paragraph (2) shall be regarded as forming part of the funds
appropriated in the relevant annual budget estimates for that financial year.
Approval of the Annual Budget Estimates by the County Assembly.
37. (1) Where a county assembly approves any changes in the annual estimates of budget
under section 131 of the Act, any increase or reduction in expenditure of a Vote, shall not
exceed one (1%) percent of the Vote's ceilings'.
(2) Following the approval of any changes in the annual estimates of budget envisaged
under paragraph (1)—
(a) the speaker of the County Assembly shall submit a copy of annual budget estimates
to the County Executive Committee Member within seven days of its approval; and
(b) the County executive Committee Member shall in turn submit a copy of the
approved budget estimates to the National Treasury and the Controller of Budget
within 14 days of its approval.
[L.N. 230/2015, r. 5.]
Expenditure before approval of budget estimates by County Assembly.
38. (1) If estimates of budget submitted to the County Assembly for a financial year have
not been approved by the County Assembly or are not likely to be approved by the County
Assembly, by the beginning of the financial year, the Controller of Budget may authorize
withdrawals from the County Revenue Fund based on the last approved budget by the County
Assembly up to fifty (50%) percent for the purposes of meeting expenditure of the County
government for the financial year.
(2) The authority under paragraph (1) shall cease upon assent of the Appropriation Act
for the financial year.
(3) The expenditure incurred under paragraph (1), shall form part of expenditures for the
financial year.

-- 461 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 463
[Subsidiary]
Supplementary budgets estimates.
39. (1) Each Accounting Officer shall within the guidelines of the supplementary budget
circular and in conformity with budget guidelines issued by the County Executive Committee
Member, prepare revised budget estimates in the format to be issued by the Cabinet Secretary.
(2) Prior to incurring any expenditure under paragraph (1), Accounting Officers shall
seek the approval of the County Treasury, and if approval is granted by the County
Executive Committee Member, it shall be communicated to the Accounting Officers through
a notification which shall be copied to the Auditor-General and the Controller of Budget.
(3) The purpose for which approval is sought for a supplementary budget shall be—
(a) unforeseen and unavoidable, in circumstances where no budget provision was
made; or
(b) unavoidable, in circumstances where there is an existing budgetary provision
which, however, is inadequate.
(4) For purposes of paragraph (3), the following shall not be considered unforeseen and
unavoidable expenditure—
(a) expenditure that, although known when finalizing the estimates of the original
budget, could not be accommodated within allocations; and
(b) tariff adjustments and price increases.
(5) Accounting Officers may seek supplementary budget if the expenditure cannot be met
by budget reallocation under section 154 of the Act.
(6) The request for supplementary budget in paragraph (5) shall be presented in a format
that facilitates comparison with the original budget and shall contain all the information
necessary to enable a decision on the application to be reached and shall include—
(a) the Vote, program, sub-programme and broad expenditure category which it is
desired to supplement, the original sum voted thereon and any supplements which
may have since been added;
(b) the actual expenditure and the outstanding liabilities or commitments against the
item on the date when the request is made;
(c) the amount of the supplement required, the reasons why the supplement is
necessary and why it has not been possible to keep within the voted provision;
(d) the basis for the calculation underpinning the supplementary;
(e) the proposed source of financing of the additional expenditure;
(f) an analysis of the fiscal impact of the additional expenditure, or of the implications,
if any, for the planned outputs and outcomes of the affected programmes;
(g) any implied deviation from the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and
the financial objectives; and
(h) the latest fiscal projections.
(7) The county government entity requesting additional funds through a supplementary
budget process shall submit a memorandum to the County Treasury, on a date determined
by County Treasury.
(8) For avoidance of doubt, budget allocations for new policy options and service delivery
initiatives shall only be considered when introduced in the annual estimates of budget in
accordance with the procedure laid down in the Act and these Regulations.

-- 462 of 625 --

464 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(9) In approving any estimates under sections 135 and 154 of the Act, that County
Assembly approval shall not exceed ten (10%) percent of the approved budget estimates of a
program of Sub-Vote unless it is for an unforeseen and unavoidable need as defined in section
112 of the Act.
(10) The County Executive Committee member shall submit a copy of the budget estimates
approved under this regulation to the National Treasury.
Budget classification and the standard chart of accounts.
40. (1) Each county government's budget estimates shall be prepared, accounted for and
reported in accordance with the Government of Kenya budget classification and standard chart
of accounts issued by the National Treasury.
(2) As much as practicable, these classifications shall be designed to support financial and
economic reporting requirements in the Act and generally accepted international standards.
PART V – BUDGET EXECUTION
General rules relating to budget Execution.
41. (1) Overall control of county government budget execution shall be exercised through
strict application of the following general rules, which shall apply to all transactions with the
specific exception of debt service payments—
(a) aggregate reallocations for a particular appropriation line in a given fiscal year may
not exceed' the amount appropriated for that line in the annual Appropriations
Act amended from time to time through budgetary reallocations made pursuant to
section 154 of the Act and any supplementary Appropriations Acts enacted under
section 135;
(b) total payments for a detailed budget line in a given fiscal year may not exceed the
reallocations issued against that budget line.
(2) Debt service payments shall be a first charge on the County Revenue Fund and the
Accounting Officer shall ensure this is done to the extent possible that the county government
does not default on debt obligations.
(3) Debt payments shall be made whether or not they meet the general rules, provided that
the County Executive Committee Member reports of any excess over appropriations, with full
explanations of the circumstances, to County Assembly in the next quarterly reporting cycle.
(4) Other than temporary treasury liquidity management operations, no payment shall
be made from the County Revenue Fund as a direct charge, except under an item identified
in the annual budget estimates.
Accounting Officers to exercise budgetary control measures.
42. An Accounting Officer shall—
(a) sign financial statements thereby making himself or herself responsible for their
correctness;
(b) ensure that public funds entrusted to their care are properly safeguarded and are
applied for purposes for only which they were intended and appropriated by the
County Assembly;
(c) ensure all appropriation-in-aid due to county government entity are collected and
properly accounted for in accordance with the relevant laws, rules and Regulations;
(d) manage control and ensure that policies are carried out efficiently and wastage of
public funds is eliminated; and

-- 463 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 465
[Subsidiary]
(e) ensure each county government entity has an audit committee in place.
Accounting Officers to request cash on the basis of an approved quarterly cash disbursement
schedule.
43. (1) Accounting Officers shall provide the County Treasury with an annual cash flow
plans as a requisition for funds needed for that financial year.
(2) County government entities shall execute their approved budgets based on the annual
appropriation legislation, and the approved annual cash flow plan with the exception of
unforeseen and unavoidable spending dealt with through the County Emergency Fund, or
supplementary estimates.
(3) The annual cash flow plans prepared by Accounting Officers shall be broken down into
a three month rolling basis and shall be adjusted to reflect any implementation realities in
consultation with the County Treasury.
(4) As far as possible, quarterly cash flow projections prepared by the Accounting
Officers shall be supported by a procurement plan approved in accordance with the Public
Procurement and Disposal Act (Cap. 412C).
Consolidation and approval of cash limits issued to accounting officers.
44. (1) The County Treasury shall consolidate all expenditure requirements and
projections as forwarded by Accounting Officers, compare with the projected revenues
including county net domestic borrowing, and thereafter in consultation with Accounting
Officers, agree on an indicative annual cash flow forecast limit for that financial year.
(2) The County Treasury shall issue a County Treasury circular communicating cash flow
projections agreed with the Accounting Officers.
(3) In the event of unanticipated cash flow fluctuations, the County Treasury shall inform
the Accounting Officers through a circular requesting them to review and submit revised cash
flow projections in line with the guideline set out in the circular.
Release of funds to meet expenditure.
45. (1) The basis for requisition of funds for grant of credit by the Controller of Budget on
the account of the accounting officer from the county exchequer account shall be based on the
approved cash flow plans communicated to that accounting officer by the County Treasury.
(2) Release of Funds from the County Revenue Fund to County government entities shall
be in accordance with the authority granted by the Controller of Budget together with the
written instructions of the County Treasury.
(3) The County Treasury shall make requisition from the Controller of Budget as necessary
for the exchequer withdrawal of funds which shall be placed to the credit of an accounting
officers' entity account.
(4) Pursuant to the grant of credit in paragraph (3), the County Treasury shall issue an
exchequer notification informing the accounting officer of the amounts authorized.
(5) The County Treasury may require accounting officers to review their cash flow plans in
line with changes in revenue realization, shortfalls in borrowing and unforeseen expenditures.
(6) The County Treasury shall publish and publicize the quarterly liquidity position
reports reflecting the impact of revenue collection efforts, spending and county public debt
operations on the cash position of county government.
Budget Variation.
46. (1) The Accounting Officer shall inform his or her responsible County Executive
Committee Member immediately of any circumstances that are likely to affect materially the

-- 464 of 625 --

466 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
budgetary results either through revenue and expenditure or other receipts and payments of
the county government entity
(2) The Accounting Officer shall inform his responsible County Executive Committee
Member of actions taken to mitigate any budget variations.
(3) The responsible County Executive Committee Member shall take the necessary steps to
bring to the notice of the County Executive Committee, any warnings of significant or material
budget variations.
Budget reallocation.
47. (1) For purposes of section 154(3) of the Act, Accounting Officers, may authorize
reallocation of funds within programmes or sub-votes provided that—
(a) this does not affect the total voted provision;
(b) the provisions in the budget of the programme or sub-vote from within which the
funds are to be transferred are unlikely to be utilized;
(c) reallocation is in accordance with donor conditions in the case of reallocation
impacting on donor-funded expenditure;
(d) the reallocation does not affect the voted provisions from wage to non-wage
expenditure or from capital to recurrent expenditure; and
(e) allocations earmarked by the County Treasury for a specific purpose may not be
used for other purposes, except with Treasury's approval.
(2) Accounting Officers shall keep a register of all budgetary reallocations and use it to
prepare a report of all reallocations to the County Treasury not later than the 10th day of each
month and the report shall state measures taken by the Accounting Officer to mitigate against
future reallocations.
(3) The report referred to in paragraph (2) shall state the impact that the reallocations
may have had on program objectives, planned program outputs and outcomes.
(4) The County Treasury shall consolidate all reallocations and include them in the next
revised budget.
(5) The reallocations under this regulation shall be approved by the respective Accounting
Officer of the entity.
Reallocation between programmes and sub-votes.
48. The reallocations by the County Treasury in terms of section 154(2) of the Act shall be
included in the next revised budget for submission to and approval by the County Assembly.
Advances from the County Emergency Fund.
49. (1) Where an Accounting officer accesses the County Emergency Fund in accordance
with section 112 of the Act, that accounting officer shall first identify resources within his or
her vote through identification of savings for re-allocation before applying for financing from
the County Emergency Fund.
(2) If an accounting officer is satisfied that there are no savings within his or her vote and
the need meets the criteria set under section 112 of the Act and paragraph (1), the accounting
officer shall—
(a) give reasons why he or she believes the need meets the criteria under section 112
of the Act;
(b) issue a certificate confirming that the need meets the criteria under section 21 of
the Act and paragraph (1) of this regulation;

-- 465 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 467
[Subsidiary]
(c) the certificate shall be countersigned by the County Executive Committee Member
for that entity; and
(d) submit the request to the County Executive Committee Member responsible for
Finance for consideration.
(3) The County Executive Committee Member shall consider the request and assess if the
need meets the criteria set under section 112 of the Act and may approve it or reject it.
Commitment for goods or services.
50. (1) All commitments for supply of goods or services shall be done not later than the
31st May each year except with the express approval of the accounting officer in writing.
(2) Expenditure commitments for goods and services shall be controlled against spending
and procurement plans approved by the responsible Accounting Officer, based on allocations
and allotments from approved budgets.
(3) The Accounting Officer of that government entity shall make an expenditure
commitment only against the procurement plan approved for that entity in accordance with
the Public Procurement and Disposal Act and Regulations made thereunder.
(4) At minimum, a procurement plan shall include proper descriptions of the procuring
items, unit cost, the estimated contract value, and the procurement method relating to the
annual portion of a multi-year contract and delivery schedule.
(5) Any changes to approved procurement plan during the year shall be approved by the
responsible Accounting Officer in consultation with the county executive committee member
responsible for that entity.
(6) Any public officer who contravenes the provisions this regulation commits an offence.
Vote Control Procedures.
51. Any public officer who holds any post involving, in any degree, the management of
public funds, and in particular every officer to whom is delegated the power to expend or
receive such funds shall, in the county government's interest and in his own interest, be aware
of the essentials of vote control procedures outlined here below—
(a) no public officer shall spend or commit funds until he or she has been properly
authorized by means of an Authority to Incur Expenditure (AIE) to do so;
(b) AIE holders shall be made to understand that the limit to which they may spend is
that prescribed by the authority and not their expectations, however justified these
may seem;
(c) the AIE issued to a public officer shall in the minimum contain—
(i) the AIE number and to whom issued;
(ii) the authorized total expenditure;
(iii) a description of the expenditure item; and
(iv) the account code to which the. expenditure is to be debited;
(d) when the AIE is issued by the county department or agency, the allocation shall be
entered as a commitment in the county department's or agency's master vote book
so as to ascertain at all times the availability of uncommitted funds;
(e) accounting officers whose votes cover field programmes, sub-county and projects
shall issue AIE's to their field programmes, sub-county and project officers not later
the 15th day of each quarter;

-- 466 of 625 --

468 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(f) public officers issued with AIE's shall also be informed in writing that the actual
expenditures shall not exceed the limit authorized in the AIE's;
(g) sub-AIE's may be issued by AlE holders where necessary and where subcounty
treasuries have been established;
(h) all AIE's to field public officers shall show the following details at the minimum
and copies submitted to the Auditor-General—
(i) the gross total amount of funds per Vote allocated and applied against the
AIE issued; and
(ii) the total amount of AIA to be collected;
(i) each accounting officer shall cause records to be kept in such a form as shall clarify
at any time, in respect of each of his or her votes—
(i) the total amount of expenditure sanctioned for service of the year;
(ii) the amount of the expenditure charged;
(iii) any further known liabilities in respect of the year; and
(j) the AIE holders shall note the following in terms of control of expenditure—
(i) there shall be no divided responsibility, only the officer to whom the AIE
has been issued is permitted to commit or incur expenditure against it; and
(ii) an AlE holder shall not wait for suppliers to submit invoices in order to
clear his commitment, but he or she shall regularly have his outstanding
commitments checked and enquiries made from the suppliers.
Receipt of goods and services beyond the stipulated period.
52. (1) A local purchase order or local service order shall be valid for a period of thirty
days from the date of issue.
(2) Any public officer who receives goods or services beyond the stipulated period specified
in paragraph (1) commits an offence under the Act.
(3) Any public officer involved in the processing of a payment with regard to goods or
services delivered after due date shall inform the accounting officer of this anomaly before
proceeding to process the payment.
(4) The public officer in charge who fails to ensure the local service order or local purchase
order is cancelled after thirty days commits an offence under the Act.
Unauthorized spending.
53. (1) Except as provided for in the Act and these Regulations, an Accounting Officer of
an entity may not authorize payment to be made out of funds earmarked for specific activities
for purposes other than those activities.
(2) A public officer who makes a payment contrary to paragraph (1) commits an offence
under the Act.
Monthly reporting obligations by Accounting Officers.
54. (1) An Accounting Officer of a county government entity shall not later than the
10th day of each month submit a monthly financial and non-financial budgetary report in
the format to be issued by the Cabinet Secretary relating to the activities of his or her
county government entity for the preceding month to the County Treasury with copies to the
Controller of Budget and the Auditor-General.
(2) The contents of the report under paragraph (1) shall include—
(a) actual revenues, including appropriations in aid;

-- 467 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 469
[Subsidiary]
(b) expenditures classified in economic classification as follows—
(i) compensation to employees;
(ii) use of goods and services;
(iii) transfer to other levels of government; and
(iv) capital expenditure;
(c) pending payments with an age of over ninety days;
(d) projection of expected expenditure and revenue collection for the remainder of the
financial year;
(e) when necessary, an explanation of any material variances; and
(f) a summary of the steps that are to be taken to ensure that the projected expenditure
and revenue remain within budget.
Contracts with multi-year financial implications.
55. (1) A county government entity may enter into a contract which will impose financial
obligations on the county government entity beyond a financial year.
(2) Contracts imposing financial obligations in excess of one year may be concluded by
the accounting officer only if—
(a) the accounting officer discloses all finalized and signed contracts by the beginning
of a financial year;
(b) the finalized and signed contracts are budgeted for first, before new projects are
considered by the accounting officer of the county government entity; and
(c) the accounting officer secures the resources required in line with the financing
requirements set out in the contracts.
Reorganisation of government functions.
56. (1) The county government may make policy changes in a financial year leading to—
(a) creation of an additional county government entities; or
(b) transferring certain functions or services of an existing county government
department and agencies to—
(i) another existing county government department or agency;
(ii) a new county government department or agency; or
(c) abolition of an existing county government department or Agency and transferring
its functions or services to one or more county government department or agency.
(2) Before embarking on accounting entries and other adjustments to reflect the changes
in paragraph (1), it shall be necessary to agree on the Actual status of the vote in respect of
the following aspects of the affected functions and services based on the ledger balances of a
trial balance to be drawn on a date to be communicated by the County Treasury—
(a) the gross budgetary provision;
(b) the approved appropriation in aid, if any, and whether in cash or credit purchase;
(c) the approved development partner assistance and county government entity own
revenue whether in cash or credit purchase if any;
(d) the net budgetary provision;
(e) the gross expenditure incurred;

-- 468 of 625 --

470 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(f) the amount of county government entity own revenue and development partner
assistance applied in cash or in credit purchases; and
(g) the sharing of amounts held in the below-the-line group of accounts.
(3) When a county department or agency is abolished, its vote shall cease to function and
consequently it shall be necessary to extract a trial balance as at the date of abolition and to
ascertain the state of financial affairs of that vote which shall include—
(a) the budgetary provision;
(b) expenditure incurred; and
(c) cash balance.
(4) The statement shall also be accompanied by analysis of the below the line group of
accounts, on the basis of which, it should then be agreed on the amount of the related budget
provision, expenditure incurred and the below the line balances to be shared out, if necessary.
(5) The supplementary Appropriation Act will provide the details of the affected votes, and
the County Treasury, shall inform the affected Accounting Officers of the effective date when
they shall effect accounting entries in their books and other necessary inter-vote adjustments.
(6) The book-keeping entries of a new vote shall be effected as outlined in the National
Treasury Guidelines issued.
PART VI – MANAGEMENT OF REVENUE AND OTHER RECEIPTS
Classification of County Government Revenues.
57. (1) County government receipts may be classified into domestic receipts and external
receipts.
(2) Domestic receipts under paragraph (1) shall comprise of —
(a) domestic loans receipts;
(b) tax revenues; and
(c) non tax revenues including exchequer non tax receipts and Appropriation-in-Aid.
(3) External receipts under paragraph (1) shall comprise of—
(a) external loans including national exchequer loan receipts and credit purchase; and
(b) external grants including national exchequer grant receipts and direct payments.
Format of estimates of revenue.
58. (1) The estimates of revenues shall be in the format issued by the Cabinet Secretary
and shall include—
(a) the description of the source of revenue in terms of head code;
(b) estimated revenues;
(c) the receiver of revenue;
(d) for each revenue head, there shall be shown revenue items; and
(e) the amounts and the nature of receipts.
(2) The estimates of revenue shall include the actual revenue for the two previous financial
years (N-2) (N-1), the current financial year revenue estimates (N), and the projected revenue
estimates for the next two outer years (N+1) and (N+2).

-- 469 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 471
[Subsidiary]
Basic principles in deciding whether sums shall be applied as AIA.
59. (1) The following shall be the basic principles in deciding whether sums shall be
applied as Appropriation-in-Aid—
(a) receipts arising directly out of expenditure on a service, the primary purpose of
which is not collection of revenue (including user charges, user fees and sale of
stores) and may be Appropriated in Aid of the vote from which expenditure on the
service is met;
(b) Appropriations in Aid shall be applied against a vote;
(c) where miscellaneous receipts are individually and collectively small, and
circumstances of receipt unimportant in themselves, such receipts may be credited
to Appropriations in Aid; and
(d) sums due as Appropriations in Aid in the previous year shall be credited to the
Appropriations in Aid head of the year in which they are actually received.
(2) Despite the provision under paragraph (1), the County Executive Committee Member
may designate any type of Appropriations in Aid as revenue in furtherance of certain county
government policies.
Main forms of receipts in development estimates.
60. The following shall be the main forms of receipts which occur in development
estimates—
(a) Appropriations in Aid inform of receipts collected by any authorized county
government agency or derived from the sale of goods and services directly derived
from projects contained in the appropriate expenditure head;
(b) credit purchases charged to the appropriate head representing expenditure on the
cost of goods or services supplied and credited to the county government entity,
but such transactions may be carried out only after County Treasury's advice;
(c) direct payments from grants from external sources charged to the appropriate head
representing expenditure on the cost of goods or services supplied and credited
to the county government entity of which may be carried out only after County
Treasury's advice;
(d) loan and grant receipts through the county exchequer account; and
(e) tax and non-tax revenue through the county exchequer account.
Receivers of revenue.
61. (1) A receiver of revenue designated by the County Executive Committee Member
under section 157 of the Act, shall be responsible for the collection of and accounting for, such
items of revenue as the County Executive Committee Member may specify.
(2) A letter for the designation of receiver of revenue under paragraph (1) shall indicate his
or her responsibility and the manner in which he or she may delegate the duties of collection
of revenue to officers under him or her or of another county government entity.
(3) Despite the provisions of paragraph (2), the receiver of revenue for loans and grants
funds shall be the Chief Officer to the County Treasury, and the County Executive Committee
Member shall specify such items of revenue in the designation letter.
Collection of revenue.
62. (1) The receiver of revenue shall, in accordance with section 158 of the Act, authorize
a public officer or any of the county government entities to be a collector of revenue for county

-- 470 of 625 --

472 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
government for the collection of, and accounting for, such items of revenue as the receiver
of revenue may specify.
(2) Except with the specific authority of the collector of revenue, in no case may a
public officer whose duty involves the posting of assessment registers, rent rolls and similar
documents be authorized to collect public moneys or to post collections into a cash book.
Responsibility for revenue management.
63. (1) An accounting officer and a receiver of revenue are personally responsible for
ensuring that—
(a) adequate safeguards exist and are applied for the prompt collection and proper
accounting for, all county government revenue and other public moneys relating
to their county departments or agencies;
(b) adequate measures, including legal action where appropriate, are taken to obtain
payment;
(c) official receipts are issued for all moneys paid to county government.
(2) An accounting officer or receiver of revenue who experiences difficulty in collecting
revenues due to the county government shall report the circumstances to the County
Executive Committee Member without delay.
(3) Except with the authority of the County Executive Committee Member, no receiver of
revenue Or collector of revenue, may convert public moneys received in local currency into
foreign currency and vice versa.
(4) All public moneys collected by a receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or collected
and retained by a county government entity, shall be paid into the designated bank accounts
of the county government and shall not be used by any public officer in any manner between
the time of their receipts and payment into the bank except as provided by law.
(5) An Accounting Officer or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue shall take
disciplinary measures in line with the relevant legislation against a public officer who
contravenes paragraph (4) of this regulation.
(6) An accounting officer or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue shall ensure
adequate books of accounts are kept relating to revenue collection and management.
(7) A public officer who makes payment from monies collected under this regulation
commits an offence under the Act.
In-year reporting of revenue collection.
64. (1) The Accounting Officer or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue shall prepare
a quarterly report not later than the 15th day after the end of the quarter.
(2) The quarterly report in paragraph (1) shall include—
(a) a statement of receipts and disbursements in such form as the Public Sector
Accounting Standards Board may determine;
(b) a statement of arrears of revenue which shall be classified by financial year; and
(c) reasons for material differences between approved estimates and the actual
revenue collected.
(3) The accounting officer or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue shall include in
the report under paragraph (1), the following details in respect of each waiver or variation—
(a) the full name of each person benefiting from the waiver or variation;
(b) the amount of tax, fee or charge affected by the waiver or variation;

-- 471 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 473
[Subsidiary]
(c) the year to which the waiver or variation relates;
(d) the reasons for the waiver or variation; and
(e) the law in terms of which the waiver or variation was granted.
(4) The quarterly report under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the County Treasury,
with a copy to the Auditor General and to County Assembly.
[L.N. 230/2015, r. 6.]
Fees for services rendered by the county government.
65. (1) The Accounting Officer of a county government entity may when finalising their
budgets, review all fees, charges or the rates, scales or tariffs of fees and charges that are not
fixed by any law and that relate to revenue accruing to the County Revenue Fund.
(2) An Accounting Officer shall obtain approval from the County Treasury for the proposed
tariff structure.
(3) Information on the tariff structure shall be disclosed in the annual report, including
information on exemptions, discounts, free services and any other aspect of material influence
on the revenue yield.
Agency services and revenue management.
66. (1) When a county government entity renders agency services to another county
government entity or national government entity, all revenue receipts collected shall be
accounted for fully by the agent to the receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or accounting
officer.
(2) Any exceptional to paragraph (1) on the expenses arising from the revenue
administration costs shall be expressly agreed between the county government entity and the
respective receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or accounting officers based on a service
level agreement signed between them.
(3) Claims for agency services rendered on behalf of another county government entity
level of government, shall be based on actual revenue collected and accounted for and shall be
supported by original vouchers and shall be reflected in the books of accounts of transacting
institutions.
Refund of revenue.
67. (1) Refunds of revenue may become necessary because of collections or overcollections
made in error or because, although properly collected in accordance with an Act or these
Regulations, provision exists under the Act or Regulations for the revenue to be reclaimed
under certain circumstances in the form of a rebate or drawback.
(2) Refunds of revenue and drawbacks under paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with
the relevant legislation.
(3) Any refunds under paragraph (1) shall be provided for under an expenditure item
appropriated by County Assembly in a County Appropriation Act.
(4) Where the collection, over-collection or drawback is made in the same financial year
as that in which the revenue was originally collected, it may be authorized by the officer
prescribed in the relevant legislation to be charged as a debit item in the appropriate revenue
head.
(5) A Receiver of revenue or collector or revenue shall prepare estimates of refunds from
taxes or fees or charges for the following financial year, and submit the budget to the County
Executive Committee Member for consideration and inclusion in the budget estimates of the
County Treasury for appropriation by County Assembly.

-- 472 of 625 --

474 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(6) The estimates of refunds submitted under paragraph (5) by the receiver or collector of
revenue shall include assumptions underpinning the refund estimates.
Format of annual and quarterly statements submitted by the receivers of revenue.
68. The annual, quarterly and monthly statements by a receiver of revenue submitted to
the County Treasury under sections 158(3) and 165 of the Act, shall be in the format gazetted
by the Cabinet Secretary and at the minimum shall include—
(a) the actual revenue received by the receiver and transmitted to the county
exchequer account;
(b) the actual revenue received by the receiver and not transmitted to the county
exchequer account;
(c) the revenue arrears due but not collected; and
(d) a responsibility statement by the receiver of revenue on the revenue statement.
PART VII – MANAGEMENT OF GRANTS AND DONATIONS
Definition of terms.
69. For purposes of this Part—
(a) "grant agreement" means an instrument that gives the power to an agency to
furnish money, Property or materials to a grantee and the grantee has freedom to
pursue the grants stated purpose, but the agency does not specify the matter of
performance of the work and is not substantially involved in it;
(b) "financing agreements" are documents detailing commitments for provision of
goods, services and activities to be performed by an organization for the awarding
agency and contain specific objectives, direction, specifications, costs or methods
of performance; and
(c) "donor or development partner or external financier" is used in this Part
interchangeably to refer to the providers of external resources.
Approval of Regulations under section 139 of the Act.
70. The Regulations prepared by the County Executive Committee Member under section
139 of the Act and Approved by the County Assembly shall comply with the provisions under
this Part.
Grants, donations and sponsorships.
71. (1) Upon approval by the County Executive Committee Member, an Accounting Officer
may receive any grant, donation, or, sponsorship made in favour of the county government
entity irrespective of whether such sponsorship or grant or donation is in cash or in kind
provided that the Accounting Officer confirms with the relevant county government entity
that donations given in kind—
(a) are not harmful to health and the environment; and
(b) are in good and serviceable conditions.
(2) All cash grants and donations shall be deposited in the County Revenue Fund provided
that—
(a) such grants, donations and sponsorships are from a credible source and from
persons or entities in good standing with the Government of Kenya; and
(b) such grants, donations and sponsorships are intended to address government
development policies.

-- 473 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 475
[Subsidiary]
(3) Where the purpose of the gift, donation, or sponsorship is not apparent, the County
Executive Committee Member shall have the discretion to instruct the Accounting Officers
on its application.
(4) A county government entity is not allowed to give a county government entity cash
donations to augment the budgetary resources of designated departments.
(5) Gifts, donations or sponsorships received during the year shall be disclosed in the
annual and quarterly financial statements.
Grants administration.
72. (1) Projects implemented through grants, donations and sponsorships shall be aligned
to the national and county development policies.
(2) In identification and designing of projects funded by development partners, the areas
covered and amount allocated shall be determined by objective criteria and as far as possible
on need-based formula which may include geographical area, population and poverty index.
(3) The Accounting officer shall disclose the details under paragraph (2).
(4) Grants and donations shall be disbursed through the revenue mode of disbursement
or supply of goods and services in which case development partners shall undertake to submit
expenditure returns in a prescribed format by the County Treasury in the grant agreement.
(5) All grants shall be appropriated by County Assembly before commencement of
disbursements.
(6) Issues to do with tax exemptions, issuance of work permits, counter-part personnel,
counter-part funding, office space, demand driven technical assistance, community
contribution either in cash or in kind shall be clearly spelt out in the grant agreements, and the
county government and community contribution shall be properly assessed and quantified in
all grant supported projects.
(7) County governments shall ensure grants are factored in the budgets and counterpart
funds appropriated accordingly.
Disclosure of authorization and disbursement.
73. (1) Where authorisation has been granted for the project to start, the Accounting
Officer shall ensure public disclosure to the intended beneficiaries within thirty days of the
allocation and disbursement of the grants.
(2) After disbursement of grants, the accounting officer shall report within fifteen
days after the end of each quarter to the intended beneficiaries on the expenditures and
performance achieved in relation to the grant.
(3) During the project identification and design, the intended beneficiaries shall be
involved through public participatory approach for planning.
(4) The views of the indented beneficiaries shall be received during public forums provided
for under paragraph (3) above and their views will be considered appropriately or during
budgeting process of the next budget cycle.
(5) Where non-compliance by an accounting officer with grant conditions is established
through an audit or fiduciary review process, the County Executive Committee Member may
suspend the disbursements and institute measures to recover any amounts misappropriated
by the public officer.

-- 474 of 625 --

476 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING ON DONATIONS AND GRANTS
Monies received by way of grants and donations to be paid into a designated account.
74. (1) All monies received by way of grants and donations shall constitute public monies
and shall be paid into the County Revenue Fund.
(2) The County Executive Committee Member shall make provisions in the budget
estimates for grants and donations receivable in kind such as commodity aid for purposes of
raising cash locally.
(3) Where the quantum of the grant or donation referred to in paragraph (2) is not known,
a provision shall be included in the estimates and when the quantum becomes known a
supplementary estimate shall be raised for the amount involved.
(4) Where grants and donations are receivable in kind, the value of such donations shall
be determined and included in the estimate and reflected as expenditure in the financial year.
(5) Monies received for specified projects which have been paid into the County Revenue
Fund, shall be released when required to the appropriate project bank account.
(6) An accounting officer of a county government entity shall—
(a) cause to be kept and maintained proper books of accounts and records in respect
of all projects and donations;
(b) ensure that wheneverprojects are completed, the project assets including
buildings, plant, vehicles, furniture, fittings and equipment are properly recorded
and handed over to the accounting officer in accordance with the financing
agreement;
(c) where no time frame is provided for the project, ensure that the assets are handed
over within three months from the date of the closure of the project; and
(d) in the absence of any instructions to the contrary, any unexpended balance
standing in the credit of the project account shall be paid into the County Revenue
Fund.
Project selection criteria.
75. It shall be the responsibility of the County Treasury to ensure that any project
approved for financing through grants and donations—
(a) has been approved by the accounting officer; and
(b) the project feasibility study report has been inspected and approved by the relevant
county government entity.
Project bank account.
76. (1) For the purpose of disbursement of project funds, there shall be opened and
maintained a project account for every project at Central Bank of Kenya unless it is exempted
by the Cabinet Secretary in writing where the CBK has no branch or banking facilities, into
which all funds shall be kept and such an account shall be known by the name of the project
for which it is opened and each project shall maintain only one bank account.
(2) All foreign currency designated bank accounts shall be kept at the Central Bank of
Kenya for county government entities unless exempted in writing by the Cabinet Secretary
under paragraph (1) of this regulation.
(3) Every payment or instruction for payment out of the project account shall be strictly
on the basis of the approved estimates of budget and financing agreement.

-- 475 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 477
[Subsidiary]
Records of receipts and disbursements.
77. The Accounting Officer of a project shall compile and maintain a record showing all
receipts, disbursements and actual expenditure on a monthly basis in respect of every project
and subproject and shall—
(a) make monthly interim financial returns;
(b) make quarterly financial management returns; and
(c) submit a summary of the records for each quarter and year to the division
responsible for external resources in the County Treasury not later than fifteen (15)
days after the end of every quarter.
Responsibilities of NGOs where the project is implemented by NGO.
78. (1) Non Governmental Organisations that implement development programs funded
by public funds, including donor funding shall be accountable through regular financial
reporting and submission of audited annual financial statements to the relevant accounting
officer in a format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
(2) NGO's in paragraph (1) of this regulation, shall be registered by the responsible
national licensing authority and in accordance with the relevant law under which that
authority is established.
Documents to be attached by NGOs where the project is implemented by NGO.
79. (1) Documents to be attached to the financial reports and annual audited accounts in
regulation 78 shall include a certificate of registration confirming that the NGO—
(a) is a body corporate and separate from its members, with perpetual succession;
(b) can engage in public interest activities and public fund raising within the county;
and
(c) is eligible for such fiscal or other benefits and privileges, as may be applicable to
NGOs from time to time.
(2) In addition to requirements under paragraph (1) of this regulation, the NGO shall also
submit—
(a) its annual performance report outlining the activities undertaken by the NGO in
the year;
(b) an annual return reflecting details of its trustees, directors, office bearers and
auditors;
(c) its sources of funding;
(d) in the event of any amendment to its constitution or governance instrument during
the financial year, a certified copy of such amendment; and
(e) in the event of any amendment to its constitution or governance instrument during
the financial year, a certified copy of such amendment.

-- 476 of 625 --

478 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
PART VIII – COUNTY TREASURY AND CASH MANAGEMENT
Composition of County Revenue Fund.
80. (1) The County Treasury shall administer the County Revenue Fund in accordance
with the Constitutional provisions in Article 207 and 209 (3) and (4) in controlling revenue
receipts to ensure that—
(a) all revenue receipts by the county government are paid into the County Exchequer
Account, except revenue receipts reasonably excluded by the Act, or any other Act
of Parliament or an Act of County Assembly; and
(b) withdrawals from the County Revenue Fund are done—
(i) in accordance with an appropriation by an Act of County Assembly; or
(ii) as a direct charge against the County Revenue Fund authorized by the Act,
an Act of Parliament or an Act of County Assembly.
(2) The administrator of the County Revenue Fund shall keep proper books of accounts of
the County Revenue Fund in accordance with standards and formats prescribed by the Public
Sector Accounting Standards Board.
Process of receipts into County Revenue Fund.
81. (1) Receivers of revenue shall promptly deposit into the County exchequer account
all receipts due to the County Revenue Fund.
(2) The receivers of revenue shall promptly pay the revenue received into the County
Revenue Fund, as soon as possible and in any case not later than five (5) working days after
receipt thereof.
(3) The County Treasury shall issue a receipt to a receiver of revenue to acknowledge the
receipt of revenue thereof.
CASH AND BANKING ARRANGEMENTS
Criteria for approval of opening and operating county government entities bank accounts.
82. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 119 of the Act, the following criteria shall be
considered by the County Treasury before granting approval to a county government entity
to open and operate a county government bank account—
(a) all county exchequer accounts shall be opened at the Central Bank of Kenya;
(b) for avoidance of doubt, all county government bank accounts shall be opened at
the Central Bank of Kenya except for imprest bank accounts for petty cash.
(2) All county government entities operating bank accounts outside the provisions of
paragraph (1), shall comply with the provisions under this Regulation within six (6) months
from the date of commencement of these Regulations.
(3) Except with the prior authority of the County Treasury, no accounting officer may open
a bank account for the deposit, custody or withdrawal of public moneys or other moneys for
which he or she is responsible in his or her official capacity or for the transaction of official
banking business.
(4) The authority of County Treasury shall be conveyed in writing to the responsible
Accounting Officer with a copy to the Controller of Budget and the Auditor-General.
(5) County Treasury may prescribe the banking rules and the maximum balance which may
be held in any official County Treasury Single Account sub account or other bank accounts,
and if at any time this balance seems likely to be exceeded, the officer operating the accounts
shall consult County Treasury on the action to be taken.

-- 477 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 479
[Subsidiary]
(6) No official county government bank account shall be overdrawn, nor shall any advance
or loan be obtained from a bank account for official purposes beyond the limit authorized by
the County Treasury in line with section 119 (4) of the Act.
(7) The authority in paragraph (7) shall be conveyed in writing to the responsible
Accounting Officer and copied to the Auditor-General.
(8) Personal cheques shall not be deposited in an official bank account.
Guiding principles for cash management.
83. (1) The County Treasury shall be responsible for establishing sound cash management
systems, procedures and processes, to ensure efficient and effective banking and cash
management practices.
(2) For purposes of this regulation, sound cash management includes—
(a) assessing the cash inflows and outflows expected at any one time;
(b) ensuring payments, including transfers to Other levels of government and county-
government entities are made when due for efficient, effective and economical
programme delivery and the county government's normal terms for account; or
(c) avoiding accumulation of idle balances;
(d) using short term borrowing only when it is necessary;
(e) avoiding prepayments for goods or services unless required by the contractual
arrangements with the supplier;
(f) accepting discounts to effect early payment only when the payment has been
included in the monthly cash flow estimates provided to the County Treasury;
(g) pursuing debtors with appropriate sensitivity and rigour to ensure that amounts
receivable by the county government are collected and banked promptly; and
(h) recognizing the time value of money and managing inventories to the minimum
level necessary for efficient and effective programme delivery, and selling surplus
or under-utilised assets.
(3) County government overdraft at the Central Bank of Kenya shall be retired by the end
of the financial year.
Surrender of End-of-Year Surplus Cash Balances.
84. Not later than the 31st January each year, each Accounting Officer shall surrender to
the County exchequer account unexpended voted money or excess Appropriations-in-Aid, as
confirmed by Auditor-General in the audit report.
Cheques and electronic payments.
85. (1) All signatories in respect of cheques, or electronic payments and fund transfers
shall be designated by the Accounting Officer and any changes in signatories shall be
authorized by him or her.
(2) There shall be two authorized signatories to sign a cheque drawn or electronic payment
or fund transfer on a county government bank account.
(3) The names and designation of those officers in paragraph (1) and their specimen
signatures shall be advised to the bank where the account is held by the accounting officer,
with copies of the advice sent to the County Treasury, and any change in signatories shall be
advised in writing.

-- 478 of 625 --

480 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(4) The signatories under this regulation shall—
(a) initial the counterfoil or enter with their personal passwords;
(b) be equally responsible for the regularity of the payment; and
(c) thoroughly scrutinize the documents supporting the payment.
(5) Spoilt cheques shall be marked prominently with the stamp "cancelled", and fixed
securely to the cheque-list used for controlling the cheques issued each day.
Cash Management Advisory Committee.
86. (1) The County Executive Committee Member may establish a Cash Management
Advisory Committee.
(2) The Cash Management Advisory Committee under paragraph (1) shall be comprised
of—
(a) Chief Officer of the County Treasury who shall be the chairperson or an Officer
designated by him or her;
(b) the department responsible for accounting policy within the County Treasury,
which shall also provide the secretariat;
(c) the department responsible for economic affairs in the County Treasury;
(d) the department responsible for public debt management in the County Treasury;
and
(e) the department responsible for budget matters in the County 'Treasury.
(3) The responsibilities of the Cash Management Advisory Committee shall be determined
by the County Executive Committee Member during its establishment.
Registers and records of county government bank accounts.
87. (1) The County Head of Accountancy Services shall maintain a register of all CTSA sub
accounts and other bank accounts opened by County government entities including public
funds and donor funded projects.
(2) The office of the County Head of Accountancy Services shall reconcile periodically the
government bank accounts list, with the records maintained by the Central Bank of Kenya.
(3) The Accounting Officer of a county government entity shall, by the 30th September
of each year, provide the County Treasury with an up-dated list of bank accounts held by the
county government entity.
(4) The list referred to under paragraph (3) shall include the following information—
(a) name of the bank where the account is held;
(b) name of the bank account;
(c) type of bank account;
(d) signatories of the bank account;
(e) date on which the bank account was opened;
(f) the bank account number;
(g) purpose for the bank Account, if different from the main operational bank account
of the government entity;
(h) the bank account balances as at 30th June each year; and

-- 479 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 481
[Subsidiary]
(i) the reference number and date of the County Treasury, letter granting approval for
opening and operating the bank account.
Authority to have access to county government bank accounts.
88. (1) The County Treasury shall, when granting authority to Accounting Officers to open
and operate bank accounts, require them to include as a pre-condition to that bank, that the
County Executive Committee Member may request bank statements for that account without
any reference to the authorized bank signatories of that bank account.
(2) The County Executive Committee Member may suspend the operations of any county
government bank account or impose certain conditions, if he or she reasonably believes the
purpose of that account no longer exists, or that fraud or fraudulent transactions are being
undertaken in that specific account and shall institute investigations immediately.
(3) Where in the opinion of the County Executive Committee Member finds it necessary, he
or she may share the report of the investigation carried out in paragraph (2) with the Auditor-
General and the Controller of Budget.
Security for cash in transit.
89. The Accounting Officers shall ensure that adequate arrangements are made to protect
both cash and staff for cash in transit and such measures shall include the following—
(a) safe or strong rooms and restricted access to the cash handling locations;
(b) police or armed security escorts;
(c) the security bags locked to the vehicle; and
(d) suitable transport and variation of movement, times, and routes.
Reconciliation of bank accounts.
90. (1) Accounting Officers shall ensure bank accounts reconciliations are completed
for each bank account held by that Accounting Officer, every month and submit a bank
reconciliation statement not later than the 10th of the subsequent month to the County
Treasury with a copy to the Auditor-General.
(2) Similar reconciliations shall be carried out when responsibility for any bank account
or cheque book is handed over from one officer to another and on the occasion of any surprise
inspection or survey.
(3) Accounting Officers shall ensure any discrepancies noted during bank reconciliation
exercise are investigated immediately and appropriate action taken including updating the
relevant cash books.
(4) The County Treasury shall analyze and review the bank reconciliation statements
submitted under paragraph (3) of this regulation and take the necessary action.
MANAGING IMPREST TRANSACTIONS
Nature of imprest.
91. (1) For the purposes of this subpart, an imprest is a form of cash advance or a float
which the Accounting Officer may authorize to be issued to officers who in the course of duty
are required to make payments which cannot conveniently be made through the cash office
of a government entity or bank account.
(2) The officer authorized to hold and operate an imprest shall make formal application
for the imprest through an imprest warrant.

-- 480 of 625 --

482 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) Funds disbursed for imprest shall not be kept or held in an official bank account, but
in a separate or personal bank account operated by the imprest holder or in the form of cash
under safe.
Determination of imprest levels.
92. (1) The Accounting Officer or Authority to Incur Expenditure (AIE) holder shall
approve the establishment of an imprest facility including the maximum amount for the
specific purpose of that facility.
(2) In determining the level of an imprest, many factors shall be considered, but in the
interest of economy and as a matter of prudence, an imprest shall be fixed at the lower figure
compatible with requirements and in any case a standing imprest shall not exceed one month's
estimated expenditure on the intended purpose.
Classes of imprest.
93. (1) An imprest shall be issued for a specific purpose, and any payments made from it,
shall be only for the purposes specified in the imprest warrant.
(2) There are two types of imprests namely—
(a) Temporary or Safari imprest; and
(b) Standing Imprest.
(3) Temporary imprests shall be issued mainly in respect of official journeys and are
intended to provide officers with funds with which they can meet travelling, accommodation
and incidental expenses.
(4) Before issuing temporary imprests under paragraph (2), the Accounting Officer shall
ensure that—
(a) the main objective of the journey cannot be achieved by other cheaper means;
(b) the applicant has no outstanding imprests;
(c) the applicant imprest has been recorded in the imprest register including the
amount applied for; and
(d) that adequate funds are available against the relevant items of expenditure to meet
the proposed expenditure.
(5) A holder of a temporary imprest shall account or surrender the imprest within seven
(7) working days after returning to duty station.
(6) In the event of the imprest holder failing to account for or surrender the imprest on
the due date, the Accounting Officer shall take immediate action to recover the full amount
from the salary of the defaulting officer with an interest at the prevailing Central Bank Rate.
(7) If the Accounting Officer does not recover the temporary imprest from the defaulting
officer as provided for in this regulation he or she commits an offence as provided under the
Act.
(8) In order to effectively and efficiently manage and control the issue of temporary
imprests, an accounting officer or AIE Holder shall ensure that no second imprest is issued to
any officer before the first imprest is surrendered or recovered in full from his or her salary.
(9) If the accounting officer or AIE Holder under paragraph (8) does not comply with the
provisions of this paragraph, he or she commits an offence as provided under the Act.
(10) If an imprest is to be recovered from any public officer by instalments, the Accounting
Officer shall personally authorize such recovery and such moneys shall no longer be an
imprest but an unauthorized advance from county government funds, and in addition to

-- 481 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 483
[Subsidiary]
the interest charged under paragraph (6), the Accounting Officer shall take appropriate
disciplinary action against the officer concerned for the abuse of the imprest.
(11) Standing imprest shall be intended to be in operation for a time and requires
bringing the cash level of the advance continuously up to the agreed fixed level by systematic
reimbursement of expenses
(12) Standing imprest shall involve personal responsibility as it shall be issued to an officer
in his or her own name, and not to the holder of an office.
(13) When an imprest holder leaves the service, or is transferred, he or she shall surrender
the total standing imprest which includes cash plus payment vouchers which together amount
to the fixed level of the imprest, and a new imprest issued to his successor.
(14) The holder of a standing imprest shall keep a memorandum cash book to record all
receipts and payments and the balance on hand shall agree with the cash balance recorded in
the memorandum cash book, and in the absence of any receipts, the actual cash balances plus
the expenses paid shall equal at all times the fixed level of the imprest for which the imprest
holder is personally responsible.
(15) When the imprest holder needs to have his or her funds replenished, he or she shall
send an abstract and analysis of his or her memorandum cash book, plus originals of the
supporting payment vouchers to accounts division.
(16) If the accounts division in paragraph (15) is satisfied that the expenditure has actually
been incurred, and that it has been incurred for the intended purposes, and there is no
irregularity in the payment vouchers, it shall arrange for the analysed expenditure to be
posted to the various heads and items, and arrange for the cash to be transferred to the imprest
holder so as to "top-up" his or her fund.
(17) In addition to paragraph (15) the head of accounts division shall also ensure that
frequent spot checks are made of the standing imprest itself by a responsible officer as
follows—
(a) count the cash on hand;
(b) Confirm that the actual cash on hand corresponds with the balance on hand as
recorded in the memorandum cash book;
(c) ensure that the documents justify the difference between the fixed imprest level
and the actual cash balance; and
(d) report on any anomalies found to the head of the accounts section.
Duties of Imprest Holders.
94. An officer holding an imprest shall ensure that—
(a) the imprest issued to him or her shall be used for the intended purpose only;
(b) the imprest moneys and any payment vouchers awaiting replenishment are
adequately safeguarded at all times;
(c) proper cash sale receipts are received for all payments out of the imprest;
(d) the full amount of the imprest can be accounted for at all times in cash, stamps,
money at bank and completed payment vouchers; and
(e) goods purchased through imprest are taken on charge and certificate issued.

-- 482 of 625 --

484 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
COUNTY TREASURY SINGLE ACCOUNT
Establishment of a County Treasury Single Account.
95. (1) Each County Treasury hereby establishes a ( ............ ) County Treasury Single
Account (CTSA) pursuant to section 119 (2) of the Act, which shall become operational within
six (6) months after the commencement of these Regulations and shall be kept at the Central
Bank of Kenya.
(2) The County Executive Committee Member shall from time to time issue County
Treasury Single Account guidelines to accounting officers for the operations of the County
Treasury Single Account.
Operation of a Treasury Single Account.
96. (1) The County Treasury shall ensure operating cash balances in the CTSA sub
accounts are kept to a minimum through consolidation into a County Treasury Single Account.
(2) The County Treasury Single Account shall reflect at the minimum the following
features—
(a) unified banking arrangements to enable the County Treasury to have proper
oversight of county government cash inflows and outflows on these bank accounts;
(b) that no county government entity shall operate bank accounts outside the County
Treasury Single Account unless expressly authorized by the County Executive
Committee Member; and
(c) the comprehensive consolidation of county government controlled public monies
encompassing all government cash resources, including county exchequer account,
special funds, trust funds and other public funds unless expressly exempted by the
County Executive Committee Member.
(3) County government deposits or exchequer releases to County government entities by
the County Treasury shall be deposited in the CTSA sub-accounts and shall form part of cash
balances of these accounts.
(4) Unless exempted by an Act of Parliament or by judicial order, all deposit bank accounts
of the county government's entities shall be sub-accounts of the County Treasury Single
Account for the county governments.
PART IX – ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING
FORM AND BASIC STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS
Accounting period.
97. (1) The accounts of the county government entities shall record transactions which
take place during a financial year running from the 1st July to the 30th June.
(2) Government accounts may be kept open for adjustments or a financial year may be
kept open for a month in the following financial year for completion of the following end of
year accounting processes—
(a) in respect of the transactions up to the 30th June each year to capture expenditure
for field services;
(b) for carrying out certain inter-departmental agency adjustments; and
(c) for closing the accounts of special funds and suspense accounts.
(3) Adjustments may also be made after the close of the year by journal entries for
the correction of accounts due to miss-postings or misclassifications impacting on fair
presentation of financial statements that may be noticed after the 30th June each year.

-- 483 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 485
[Subsidiary]
(4) An actual cash transaction taking place after the 30th June, shall not, however, be
treated as pertaining to the previous financial year even though the accounts for that year
may be open for the purposes referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this regulation
(5) The County Treasury shall issue guidelines on the closure of the financial year not
later than the 15th May each year.
Charging of expenditure to year of accounts.
98. (1) The date of payment of any amount shall determine the date of the recording of
the transaction in the accounts.
(2) No advance payment shall be paid to suppliers of goods and services unless provided
for in the contractual terms and conditions contained in a valid contract signed between the
procuring entity and the supplier.
Account codes and standard chart of accounts.
99. (1) As a general rule, the classification of financial transactions in county government
entity's accounts shall be based on the standard chart of accounts approved by the National
Treasury.
(2) The approved estimates of expenditure shall form the basis of the accounts for the
financial year.
(3) Every entry in the accounts shall be supported by a voucher or other approved
document gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary containing the full details, clear narrations and
particulars of the item or items to which it relates.
Books of accounts to be kept by Accounting officers.
100. Accounting Officers shall keep in all offices concerned with receiving cash or making
payments a cash book showing the receipts and payments and shall maintain such other books
and registers as may be necessary for the proper maintenance and production of the accounts
of the Vote for which he or she is responsible.
Recording and reporting basis.
101. (1) The structure of the reporting formats shall be based on the requirements of the
Act.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary may from time to time amend the Schedule in accordance with
the prescribed standards set by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
(3) The National Treasury shall issue financial instructions and guidelines on application
of accounting policies, bases, standards and classification to be applied in financial reporting
in line with the standards set by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
(4) An Accounting Officer shall prepare the financial statements in a form that complies
with the relevant accounting standards prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards
Board, not later than three months after the end of the financial year and submit them to
the Auditor-General with a copy to the County Treasury, the Controller of Budget and the
National Treasury.
Financial records and automation of financial operations.
102. (1) Financial records may be maintained in manual and or electronic form.
(2) An Accounting Officer shall take all reasonable precautions to guard against damage,
destruction of or falsification of any financial record required to be kept by the Act or these
Regulations.

-- 484 of 625 --

486 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) An Accounting Officer shall satisfy himself or herself that where an alteration of a
financial record requires the authorization, approval or deletion of any transaction or data,
whether electronic or manual by any means other than in writing, that there is sufficient audit
trail which shall identify the person who approved the transaction.
Accounting adjustments journal.
103. (1) Journal entries prepared for all adjustments shall be authorized by the accounting
officer or an officer designated by him or her before posting them in a financial record.
(2) In all cases journal vouchers shall be supported by sufficient explanations,
authorisations and documentation to facilitate accounting adjustments to be understood.
Vouchers.
104. (1) All receipts and payments vouchers of public moneys shall be properly supported
by pre-numbered receipt and payment vouchers and shall be supported by the appropriate
authority and documentation.
(2) All receipt and payment vouchers shall be or made out in indelible ink and shall contain
adequate narration of the particulars of the services, goods or works procured and being paid
for.
(3) All amounts appearing in a voucher shall be written in words as well as in figures.
Powers to delegate voucher approval.
105. (1) An Accounting Officer or any other officer delegated in writing by him or her may
authorize payment vouchers on his or her behalf for expenditure chargeable to his or her vote,
provided such expenditure is in respect of and within the provision of the services in a County
Treasury warrant, in accordance with the law, regulations, tariff, contract or agreement that
may be applicable, and does not require special authority in terms of any law, regulation or
County Treasury instruction.
(2) Accounting Officers may prescribe the financial limits and other conditions within
which this authority in paragraph (1) may be exercised.
Deposit accounts.
106. Unless otherwise exempted by an Act of Parliament, any deposit which has remained
unclaimed for 5 years may, with the approval of the County Executive Committee Member,
be paid into County Revenue Fund and thereafter the County Executive Committee Member
may refund the deposit to any person entitled thereto, if he or she is satisfied that the claim
is authentic.
Clearance and suspense accounts.
107. (1) All the transactions relating to clearance and suspense accounts shall be
supported by authentic and verifiable source documents, clearly indicating the approved
allocation.
(2) Where it is necessary, to account for revenue and expenditure transactions in a clearing
or suspense account, the Accounting Officer shall ensure that—
(a) amounts included in clearing or suspense accounts are cleared and correctly
allocated to the relevant cost centres on a monthly basis;
(b) monthly reconciliation's are performed to confirm the balance of each account; and
(c) reports on uncleared items are prepared on a monthly basis and submitted to the
County Treasury.

-- 485 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 487
[Subsidiary]
(3) The National Treasury shall prescribe in the financial manual procedures to be used
for management of balances in suspense or clearing accounts.
Payments to beneficiaries residing outside Kenya.
108. Wherever practicable all payments of public monies made to persons outside Kenya
shall be made by direct payment or payment advice through the Central Bank of Kenya to such
persons' banks account or use of banker's draft or through the national payment system.
Use of electronic systems for financial operations.
109. (1) For efficient and effective utilization of electronic systems in processing financial
data, the National Treasury shall develop and regularly issue standard operating procedures
and instructions on the automated integrated financial management system operations, use
and maintenance.
(2) The Principal Secretary shall designate a person or persons in writing to administer
the automated integrated financial management system.
(3) The system administrator shall ensure compliance of assigned responsibilities and
when necessary take appropriate measures.
Restricted access to systems.
110. (1) The Accounting Officer for a county government entity shall institute appropriate
access controls needed to minimize breaches of information confidentiality, data integrity
and loss of business continuity.
(2) Access controls to be instituted shall include—
(a) uniform application forms for registration of new users, deregistration of users and
modification of user roles;
(b) processes of safeguarding completed application forms;
(c) segregation of duties;
(d) use of multi-factor authentication including standardization of user primary
identity linked to national identification numbers, payroll numbers and assigned
responsibilities; and
(e) utilization of appropriate password length for login.
(3) Users of the system under this regulation shall—
(a) not use or attempt to use the automated public financial management system
without authorization of the system administrator;
(b) take all reasonable steps to maintain the integrity of passwords and other security
mechanisms;
(c) where a password becomes insecure or potentially insecure, as soon as is
practicable, implement a new secure password;
(d) not do anything that damages, restricts, jeopardizes, impairs or undermines the
performance, usability, reliability, confidentiality or accessibility of any digital
information system, programme, or other stored information data;
(e) not alter, delete or in any other way interfere with, any information, data or files;
(f) be responsible for any unlawful entry on the automated public financial
management system using such persons password;
(g) undertake any tasks assigned; and

-- 486 of 625 --

488 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(h) take all measures to ensure that on the last day of each month, the financial period
of the month is closed.
(4) Failure to adhere to the closing of financial periods or to adhere to operational
protocols in paragraph (3) of this regulation constitutes an offence under the Act.
PART X – EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT
County Revenue Fund Services.
111. (1) Where an Act of Parliament or a county legislation provides for some
specific categories of expenditure to be a direct charge on the County Revenue Fund, such
expenditures shall be included in the recurrent budget estimates of the county government
as part of the County Revenue Fund Services.
(2) Subject to an Act of Parliament and for the avoidance of doubt, the County Revenue
Fund Services shall be limited to the following—
(a) county public debt; and
(b) salaries and allowances of the Governor and the Deputy-Governor.
(3) The County Revenue Fund Services shall be provided for in the recurrent estimates, but
shall not be subject to County Assembly debate nor to the expenditure limited by estimates
nor vote on account.
(4) County Revenue Fund Services shall be administered by the County Treasury.
(5) The County Treasury may arrange for another Accounting Officer to make payment in
the first place on its behalf against subsequent reimbursement from the appropriate Vote of
the County Revenue Fund Services.
Excess vote.
112. If an Accounting Officer finds, after Appropriation Accounts are completed, that he
or she has spent more than the total vote, that Accounting Officer shall seek County Assembly
approval through the County Executive Committee Member for that Excess Vote.
Payments to which an Accounting Officer objects.
113. (1) An Accounting Officer who is instructed by his or her County Executive
Committee Member to make payment which for any reasons the accounting officer has
concerns, he or she shall raise those concerns in writing to his or her County Executive
Committee Member.
(2) In the event his or her County Executive Committee Member approves for the
processing of the payment despite the concerns raised by the Accounting Officer, he or she
shall obey the instructions without further responsibility.
(3) Upon payment, the accounting officer may bring those concerns in writing under
paragraph (1) of this regulation, to the attention of the County Assembly with a copy to the
Auditor-General.
Goods, works and services to be procured according to an approved procurement plan.
114. (1) All purchases of goods, works and services from suppliers, including capital
investments, shall comply with the provisions prescribed in the Public Procurement and
Disposals Act, 2005 and the Regulations made thereunder and shall have the prior approval
of the Accounting Officer.
(2) Every year a procurement plan shall be prepared by Accounting Officers to form the
basis for procurement activities undertaken by government entities in the fiscal year.

-- 487 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 489
[Subsidiary]
(3) The procurement plan in paragraph (2) of this regulation shall, where necessary,
include estimated costs of procurement, insurance, clearing, forwarding, warehousing and
demurrage charges for goods imported and have to undergo clearing and forwarding through
ports of entry into the country.
Recovery, disallowance and adjustment of payments.
115. (1) Amounts charged to Voted Funds, which are recovered in the financial year in
which payment was made, shall on or before the closing of books of that financial year, be
allocated to the budget item that was originally debited.
(2) Such amounts which are recovered after the closing of books of a financial year shall
be paid to the County Revenue Fund, provided that such amounts have not been allocated to
a clearing or suspense account during the financial year in which payment was made.
Re-Vote of Budget.
116. (1) Where an AIE holder observes that it will not be possible to utilize all the funds
allocated for a particular project in a given financial year, the AlE holder shall inform the
accounting officer not later than the 15th February each year.
(2) The Accounting Officer shall then surrender the resources to the County Treasury and
the County Treasury shall ensure that the funds are re-voted for the project in the following
financial year in order to continue the implementation of the project.
Accountable documents.
117. (1) Accountable documents whether manual or electronic shall be under strict control
at all times and they shall include—
(a) indent forms (for supplies from government printer or government stores);
(b) local purchase order;
(c) local service order;
(d) authority to incur expenditure;
(e) cheques;
(f) receipt books;
(g) imprest warrants; and
(h) Central Bank Kenya overseas payment authority form.
(2) The Accounting officer shall keep his or her stock of accountable documents whether
manual under lock and key, issuing them in accordance with the daily needs of the service,
and keeping an accurate up-to-date record of their use by means of continuity control sheets.
(3) Where the accountable documents are in electronic form, the accounting officer shall
ensure appropriate mechanism are put in place for safeguarding and tracking them.
Preservation of accountable documents, books and records.
118. (1) Accounting Officers shall, subject to the provisions of the relevant national
legislation, retain certain documents, of whatever kind, which shall be preserved in the
following circumstances—
(a) where they may be of value to the national archives;
(b) if they are the subject of unfinished audit enquiries; or
(c) if they are likely to be needed for pension purposes (including salary records).

-- 488 of 625 --

490 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) After the expiry of the retention periods under paragraph (3) of this regulation, the
information may, if required, be secured in an alternative form that ensures the integrity and
reliability of the data and ensures that the information can be reproduced, where necessary.
(3) Subject to the overriding consideration under paragraph (1) of this regulation, certain
classes of documents and records are to be preserved for a stipulated minimum period of time
as detailed in the table below:
S/No Type of document Preservation period
1. Principal ledger 10 years
2. Cash books 10 years
3. Journals 3 years
4. Payment vouchers 5 years
5. Paid cheques or electronic
payments
3 years
6. Completed indent warrants 12 months after the end of the financial year to which they relate.
7. Completed order forms 12 months after the end of the financial year to which they relate.
8. Duplicate receipts 12 months after the end of the financial year to which they relate.
9. Duplicate payment vouchers 12 months after the end of the financial year to which they relate.
10. Receipt books:
(a) Fully used Obsolete, partly used 6 months after date of completion but must be inspected by the
Auditor-General and the disposal noted in the main counterfoils
receipts, book registers.
EXPENDITURE IN RELATION TO HUMAN RESOURCES
Expenditure in relation to human resources.
119. (1) Personnel management activities relating to gazettement of appointments, the
authorization of payments and the recording of those payments may not be performed by the
same officer.
(2) The budgetary allocation for personnel costs shall be determined on the basis of a
detailed costing of a human capital plan of a county government entity as approved by the
responsible county department for public service management matters, the County Public
Service Board and County Treasury.
(3) The Accounting Officer of a county government entity shall ensure that the personnel
cost of all appointees, as well as promotion and salary increases, can be met within the
budgetary allocation voted for the county government entity.
(4) The responsible county government department for public service management
matters, the County Public Service Board, shall only approve establishment of new public
service positions after getting confirmation of availability of budgetary provisions from the
County Treasury.
(5) For purposes of ensuring a sustainable wage bill, where the County Executive
Committee Member intends to approve any changes under this regulation, he or she may
consult the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
(6) No change relating to the above matters shall be introduced into the expenditure
estimates of the respective county government entity without the requisite authority.
Payroll certification by accounting officer.
120. (1) Personnel costs shall be classified based on the Government Finance Statistics
Manual and the standard chart of accounts used in capturing government expenditure.

-- 489 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 491
[Subsidiary]
(2) Each employee shall be linked to a program in the budget of a county government
entity's Vote.
(3) At least once every month, the accounting officer shall certify the correctness of the
payroll.
Deduction codes to be assigned to all payroll deductions.
121. (1) The County Treasury shall set requirements for issuing payroll deduction codes
for all discretionary and non-discretionary deductions.
(2) The Accounting Officer shall specify the purpose for which the code is applied for.
(3) The County Treasury may levy a fee on the discretionary deductions which shall be
paid by the receiving institution.
Remuneration of members of committees and commissions of inquiry.
122. (1) Remunerative benefits and other allowances for members and the staff of the
secretariat of special committees and commissions of inquiry shall be determined by the
county government entity responsible for matters relating to public service management
in consultation with the County Public Service Board and the County Executive Committee
Member taking into account any recommendations by the Salaries and Remuneration
Commission.
(2) The remuneration of all members of a commission or committee shall be disclosed
as foot notes to the financial statements of the county government entity by the accounting
officer.
Services rendered by members during private time.
123. Where the chairperson requests a non-official member of a commission or committee
to render services in his or her private time, other than the normal preparations for meetings,
the person may be paid an allowance as determined by the relevant Accounting Officer.
Compensation and ex-gratia payment.
124. No offer of compensation in settlement of any claim against the county government
or ex-gratia payment may be made without prior authority of the County Treasury, except
where powers are available to accounting officer to settle such claims.
BENEFITS AND ALLOWANCES OF PUBLIC OFFICERS
Authority for loans and advances.
125. (1) The accounting officer may only authorize salary advances for public officers
under him or her to be paid if there exists a budgetary provision in his or her Vote.
(2) No staff loan or advance which is properly chargeable to a head of expenditure shall
be debited to a salary advance expenditure item.
Benefits and allowances for Public Officers.
126. (1) The County Executive Committee Member may by way of a gazette establish a
mechanism for public officers to access loans including car loans, mortgage, housing loans
and bicycle loans which shall be within the guidelines issued by the Cabinet Secretary.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) of this regulation, the county executive
committee member may issue guidelines on benefits and allowances for county public officers
by way of a notice in Kenya Gazette within the guidelines issued by the Cabinet Secretary.

-- 490 of 625 --

492 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
LEASE FINANCING AND JOINT COUNTY INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS
Lease financing transactions by accounting officers of county governments.
127. (1) For the purpose of this regulation, a lease is regarded as a contract that gives the
lessee (the renter) the right to the use of property, plant or equipment for a fixed period of
time with a fixed schedule of payments to the lessor (the owner).
(2) The accounting officer of a county government entity may, for the purpose of
conducting the entity's business, enter into finance lease transactions.
(3) The accounting officer of a county government entity may under no circumstances
enter into finance leases (non-operating lease) without the approval of the relevant County
Treasury.
(4) For the purpose of paragraph (3) of this regulation, a lease is considered to be a finance
lease if—
(a) the lease transfers ownership of the asset to the government entity by the end of
the lease period;
(b) the government entity has the option to purchase the asset at a price which is
expected to be sufficiently lower than the fair value at the date the option becomes
exercisable, so that at the inception of the lease it is reasonably certain that the
option will be exercised;
(c) the lease term is for the economic life of the asset even if the title is not transferred;
(d) at the inception of the lease, the present value of the minimum lease payments
amount to at least 90% of the fair value of the leased asset;
(e) the leased asset is of azettetiosed nature such that only the government entity can
use the asset without major modifications being made;
(f) the lessor's losses associated with cancellation of the lease by the lessee is borne
by the lessee; and
(g) the leased asset cannot be easily replaced by another asset.
(5) The County Treasury shall monitor all finance lease transactions and report associated
obligations.
Joint Infrastructure Investments.
128. (1) For purposes of this regulation, "joint infrastructure investment" means any
capital project(s) initiated and undertaken as a joint venture between two or more county
governments which involve development expenditures for the project(s) where—
(a) the nature and costs of the project(s) is beyond the means of one county
government;
(b) the project traverses more than one county government territory; or
(c) the project benefits can be enjoyed by more than one county government.
(2) A joint infrastructure investment shall be solemnized through an intergovernmental
agreement which shall be filed with the office of the Attorney-General and the Department
of Justice and shall specify—
(a) the county governments involved;
(b) the management and administrative structure of the joint investment project;
(c) the description of the joint investment project and its objectives;

-- 491 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 493
[Subsidiary]
(d) the description of the joint investment project and its objectives;
(e) the responsibilities and obligations of each county government involved;
(f) the joint investment project implementation modalities including procurement
procedures and administrator of the project;
(g) the joint investment project financing options;
(h) the dispute resolution mechanisms between the county governments involved and
the arbitrator in case of any dispute;
(i) the reporting mechanism including the regularity of the reports by the
management to all county governments involved; and
(j) the apportionment of sharing of the benefits and maintenance costs, if any,
between the county governments involved.
PART XI – MONITORING AND REPORTING
Responsibility for monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
129. (1) The County Executive Committee Member responsibly for matters relating
to planning shall prescribe a framework for monitoring and reporting on non-financial
performance for use by accounting officers in evaluation of programmes and projects by
measuring—
(a) financial indicators which shall capture expenditures on the implementation of
programmes and projects;
(b) outputs indicators which shall measure what is directly supplied through the
implementation of the programmes and projects; and
(c) outcome or results indicators of the programme or projects which capture the
expected effects on intended beneficiaries of the programme or project.
(2) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to
planning, shall also set up a system that shall facilitate efficient and effective data collection,
storage and exchange to monitor and report on non-financial performance of the county
government entity's individual programmes and projects.
(3) An Accounting Officer shall put in place efficient and effective systems to monitor
and report on non-financial performance for his or her county government entity's individual
programmes and projects based on the prescribed format under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this
regulation and submit a report to the County Executive Committee Member responsible for
planning with a copy to the Auditor-General.
(4) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for planning shall consolidate
all the reports received under paragraph (2) of this regulation, and submit a report to the
County Executive Committee Member for the County Treasury and publish and publicize it
within seven (7) days after submitting it to the County Executive Committee Member.
Footnotes to appropriation accounts.
130. (1) An Accounting Officer shall provide footnotes to the annual financial statements
prepared and submitted to the Auditor-General pursuant to section 164 of the Act.
(2) The footnotes to the financial statements referred to under paragraph (1) of this
regulation, shall at the minimum include—
(a) the details of Appropriation-in-Aid;
(b) excess Appropriation-in-Aid, if any;

-- 492 of 625 --

494 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) reasons for material differences between approved estimates and actual
expenditure, or actual collection of Appropriation-in-Aid;
(d) losses and write offs;
(e) nugatory and similar payments, compensation and ex-gratia payments;
(f) arrears of Appropriation-in-Aid and Appropriation-in-Aid abandoned; and
(g) advances appropriately analyzed including imprests.
(3) Where, in respect of any footnotes referred to, in this regulation, there is nil return
that particular footnote shall be omitted entirely.
Special county public funds and County corporations additional reporting responsibilities.
131. An accounting officer of a county government entity shall disclose in the annual
financial and non-financial report a list of special funds or county corporations controlled by
that county government entity.
PART XII – ASSET MANAGEMENT
Responsibility for assets management.
132. (1) The Accounting Officer of a county government entity shall take full
responsibility and ensure that proper control systems exist for assets and that—
(a) preventative mechanisms are in place to eliminate theft, security threats, losses,
wastage and misuse;
(b) movement and conditions of assets can be tracked; and
(c) stock levels are at an optimum and economical level.
(2) The Accounting Officer shall ensure that processes and procedures both electronic and
manual are in place for the effective, efficient, economical and transparent use of the county
government entity's assets.
(3) The County Treasury shall provide guidelines on county government assets
management after seeking the views of the Cabinet Secretary which shall be given in fourteen
(14) days.
Responsibility for county government entity inventory.
133. (1) Accounting Officer shall be responsible for the proper custody, care and use
of government inventories under their control including imported goods in vessels awaiting
discharge and in customs warehouses awaiting clearance.
(2) Despite paragraph (1) of this regulation, an Accounting Officer shall be responsible
for the general management of government inventories held within that county government
entity.
(3) Accountability shall only be discharged when government inventories have been—
(a) consumed in the course of public business and records are available to show that
the government inventories have been consumed; or
(b) worn out in the normal course of public business and removed from the stores
records and has been approved by accounting officer or they have been disposed of
in accordance with the Public Procurement and Disposals Act, 2005; or
(c) lost, stolen, destroyed, damaged or rendered unserviceable other than by fair wear
and tear, and if removed from the store's records and has been approved in line
with section 150 of the Act.

-- 493 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 495
[Subsidiary]
(4) If accounting officer is satisfied that the retention of any government inventories is
no longer in the public interest, the accounting officer may authorize disposal in accordance
with the Public Procurement and Disposals Act and its Regulations.
(5) Removal from the store's records under paragraph (3) shall be reported to County
Treasury by the accounting officer.
(6) Where an Accounting Officer has reason to believe that any person—
(a) has received county government inventory and has not duly handed it over; or
(b) has received county government inventory for which the person is accountable but
has not duly accounted for it; or
(c) has in hand county government inventory which has not duly been applied to the
purpose for which they were collected,
the Accounting Officer shall serve a notice on the public officer requesting that within a
time specified in the notice, the person shall pay for, account for, or apply the inventory and
submit to the Accounting Officer satisfactory evidence that this has been done.
(7) The Accounting Officer of a county government entity shall in consultation with a
technical department review, at least annually when finalizing the budget, all fees, charges,
rates, tariffs or scales of fees or other charges relating to the letting of state property to ensure
sound financial planning and management.
Accounting Officers' responsibilities upon transfer of assets and liabilities.
134. (1) When assets or liabilities of a government entity are transferred to another
government entity or other institution in terms of legislation or following a re-organization of
government functions, the Accounting Officer for the transferring county government entity
shall be required to-—
(a) identify an inventory of such assets and liabilities; and
(b) provide the Accounting Officer for the receiving government entity or other
institution with necessary records, including human resource records of staff to be
transferred.
(2) Both the Accounting Officer for the transferring county government entity and the
Accounting Officer for the receiving county government entity or other institution shall sign
the inventory when the transfer takes place.
(3) The Accounting Officer for the transferring county government entity shall file a copy
of the signed inventory with the County Treasury and the Auditor-General within two weeks
of the transfer.
Assets accruing to the county government by operation of law.
135. Where any money, property or right accrues to the County government by operation
of law, the County Treasury, may exercise all powers, authority and prerogatives, and fulfil
any obligation on behalf of county government.
Register of assets.
136. (1) The Accounting Officer shall be responsible for maintaining a register of assets
under his or her control or possession as prescribed by the relevant laws.
(2) The register of land and buildings shall record each parcel of land and each building
and the terms on which it is held, with reference to the conveyance, address, area, dates
of acquisition, disposal or major change in use, capital expenditure, lease hold terms,
maintenance contracts and other pertinent management details.

-- 494 of 625 --

496 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) All major items including furniture and equipment issued for a government's quarters
or offices, large tools for county government works, plant, equipment, vehicles or (launches)
large motor boat shall be recorded in a register.
(4) All acquisitions or assignment of immovable property shall be notified to the County
Treasury.
(5) All acquisitions or assignment of land with or without buildings shall be notified to
the County Treasury.
Purchase and capacity of official vehicles for certain county government officers.
137. (1) Official vehicles purchased for use by Governors, shall not exceed 2600 cc for
saloon cars and 3000 cc for 4 x 4 utility vehicles.
(2) Official vehicles purchased for use by the Deputy Governors, Speakers of the County
Assembly and County Executive Committee members, shall not exceed 2400 cc for saloon cars
and 3000 cc for 4 x 4 utility vehicles.
(3) Official vehicles purchased for use by chief officers, clerks of county assemblies other
officers on Job Group R and Chief Executives of county corporations shall not exceed 2000 cc
for saloon cars and 2900 cc for 4 x 4 utility vehicles.
(4) The County Committee Member for Finance may by way of notice in the gazette specify
category of offices and the category of vehicles to be used by those public officers.
(5) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this regulation commits an offence.
LOSSES AND WRITE-OFFS
Definition.
138. For purposes of this Part, the term losses is defined to include—
(a) actual loss or destruction of, or damage (other than fair wear and tear) to, or failure
to account for the disposal of public money, stamps, securities or property, movable
or immovable (including any money or other property not belonging to the county
government which is held or used by an officer in his official capacity either alone
or jointly with any other person); or
(b) non-collection of any moneys due or belonging to a county government, or for
collection of which the county government is responsible; or
(c) payments made or liabilities incurred without or in excess of any statutory,
administrative or any other authority, including nugatory and similar payments
and payments arising from incorrect certificates, and irregular or excess issues of
stores, rations, etc.; or
(d) unauthorized use of county government stores, vehicles, buildings, equipment
or any other property, or of service (e.g. repair workshops) provided for official
purposes; or
(e) compensation and similar payments (including third party claims in respect of
vehicle accidents) legal and court costs and any other additional expenditure or
liability which was avoidable and need not have been incurred.
Accounting officers responsibility for a county government entity.
139. When a loss as defined in this regulation is discovered, the Accounting Officer shall
investigate the circumstances of the loss—
(a) to ascertain the extent and amount of the loss;

-- 495 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 497
[Subsidiary]
(b) to determine whether control or operational arrangements need to be improved in
order to prevent the occurrence of similar losses in the county government entity;
or
(c) to determine whether any offence or other fault of a public officer has been revealed
by the loss.
Disclosure of offences.
140. The investigation of a loss does not constitute a disciplinary enquiry and if the
investigation reveals that an offence has been committed, it shall be dealt with in accordance
with the relevant laws pertaining to that offence, as appropriate, and the relevant disciplinary
measures.
Procedure for handling losses.
141. (1) A loss may be revealed by defalcation or loss due to any cause, and thereafter
investigation proceedings shall be commenced immediately and a report made to the
Accounting Officer and where necessary, to the police.
(2) The report referred to under paragraph (1) of this regulation, shall give details of the
amount involved and any other information available including a brief account of actions to
prevent further loss, and effect recovery.
(3) On receipt of the report, the accounting officer shall give instructions regarding
accounting entries, if any, to be made and any other action which appears to him or her to
be necessary.
(4) Where a liability has been established for a third party, payment shall be made,
provided that there is no reason to suspect that the third party had any responsibility for the
loss and the payment shall not await the results of the investigations of the loss.
(5) If the loss falls within the accounting officers powers under section 150(1) of the Act,
he or she shall authorize the write off of the loss up to an amount not exceeding hundred
thousand (KSh. 100,000) shillings in any one incidence and submit a report to the County
Treasury and the Auditor-General.
(6) If the loss falls within the County Executive Committee Member's powers under section
150 (2) of the Act, the accounting officer shall seek the approval of the County Executive
Committee Member to authorize him or her to write off the loss of an amount exceeding the
one hundred thousand (KSh. 100,000) shilling but not exceeding one percent of the county
governments' entity's approved estimates excluding the County Revenue Fund Services in any
one incidence.
(7) The approval of the County Executive Committee Member shall be communicated to
the accounting officer in writing with a copy to the Auditor-General.
(8) Any loss exceeding the threshold set for the County Executive Committee Member for
finance shall fall within the County Executive Committee powers under section 150 (3) of the
Act, the Accounting Officer shall—
(i) Seek the approval of the County Executive Committee through the County
Executive Committee Member to authorize him or her to write off the loss
exceeding one percent of the county government entity's approved budget in any
one incidence;
(ii) The approval of the County Executive Committee shall be communicated to the
Accounting Officer through the County Executive Committee Member in writing
with a copy to the Auditor General;

-- 496 of 625 --

498 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(iii) The accounting officer shall also make a disclosure in the financial statements of
that county government entity.
(9) The accounting officer shall also make a disclosure in the financial statements of that
county government entity.
Categories of losses.
142. (1) For the purposes of this regulation, cash deficiency is a loss arising from a
deficiency of cash or other negotiable instrument, whether it arises from a simple cash
shortage or from the use of fictitious entries or vouchers to conceal the existence of a
deficiency.
(2) Revenue losses may arise from—
(a) uncollectable revenue when debts due to county government cannot be collected
by reason that the debtor cannot be traced or is insolvent; and
(b) loss of revenue, arising from failure to assess or collect in circumstances which
preclude subsequent assessment or collection, and include any loss of interest
caused by delay in making payments into the appropriate public funds or from the
making of irregular advances.
(3) Expenditure losses may arise from—
(a) irrecoverable overpayments, when an excess payment has been made by error and
recovery cannot be effected because the recipient cannot be traced or is otherwise
incapable of making repayment; or
(b) nugatory payments, which arise in circumstances such as, the incurrence of a
penalty in which a county government entity has been legally obliged to make
payment, but for which no corresponding receipt of goods or services has been
derived; or
(c) fraudulent payments which arise from transactions which involve a breach of the
criminal code, by the use of falsified documents or certificates to steal money or
other property belonging to a county government and it is not recoverable.
(4) Inventory and equipment losses may arise from—
(a) deficiencies, including fraudulent issues of stores from stock and issues of stores
without proper evidence of use; or
(b) damage or deterioration of goods in stock; or
(c) loss by accident in so far as they relate to equipment and inventories in use.
(5) Financial losses may arise from—
(a) irrecoverable advances and loans when money due to a county government entity
cannot be recovered by reason of a debtors default and include default on county
government guarantees; or
(b) irregular advances and loans when money cannot be recovered because a county
government entity cannot establish a claim against any person or institution, as in
the case of expenditure wrongly charged to advances, or advances and loans made
without agreement for recovery;
(c) reduction of financial asset where the value of any financial asset has to be reduced
by reason of failure or capital restructuring of an enterprise; or
(d) losses on sale of securities where the losses are aggregated with gains over the
financial year, and any net loss is written off at the end of the year.

-- 497 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 499
[Subsidiary]
(6) Miscellaneous losses may arise from—
(a) loss of fixed fee receipts; or
(b) the loss of safe keys of any county government safe or the compromise of any
combination lock; or
(c) the cost of altering locks and providing new keys or combinations;
(d) the value of any missing items from the safe; or
(e) irrecoverable claims dealt with as laid down in these Regulations.
Investigation of every case of loss.
143. (1) The accounting officer of a county government entity shall cause an investigation
to be conducted into every reported case of loss, and where the accounting officer of that entity
is implicated in the loss, the County Executive Committee Member shall be the appropriate
authority to cause investigation to be conducted.
(2) In the case where the investigation report implicates the accounting officer, the County
Executive Committee Member shall revoke the designation and also report the matter to the
relevant authority.
Defective systems.
144. If the report of the investigating authority indicates that systems currently in
operation, including those for the training of staff are defective, the accounting officer of the
county government entity shall consult with the County treasury to consider measures for
rectification.
Financial liability of officers.
145. (1) Recovery of the value of a loss, whether by recovery proceedings under these
Regulations, shall constitute a settlement of a civil claim against the officer arising from the
loss.
(2) Recovery of a loss shall not be a substitute for criminal prosecution or disciplinary
proceedings.
Annual statement of losses.
146. The Accounting officer shall maintain a register of all losses incurred by his or her
county government entity and attach a list of all losses incurred during that year to the
financial statements submitted to the Auditor-General for audit with a copy to the County
Treasury.
Clarifications on classification of losses.
147. Where any doubt arises on the correct classification of a loss or the accounting
procedure required the directions of the County Treasury shall be sought.
Claims on damaged or incomplete goods.
148. Where goods are received damaged or incomplete and such goods are subject to a
claim on suppliers, insurers or carriers, they shall not constitute a loss until the claims prove
irrecoverable.
Investigation of losses.
149. (1) The fact that losses arise from uncollectable revenue, irrecoverable
overpayments, or irrecoverable claims at the time of disposal does not preclude the prior
investigation of circumstances of the losses.

-- 498 of 625 --

500 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) Applications for write-off shall be accompanied by an investigation report indicating
whether remedial accounting or other action is necessary.
Writing off of losses.
150. (1) An Accounting Officer may only write off losses owed to the State if he or she
is satisfied that—
(a) all reasonable steps have been taken to recover the loss and the loss is
irrecoverable; or
(b) he or she is convinced that—
(i) recovery of the losses would be uneconomical; and
(ii) it would be to the advantage of the county government entity to effect a
settlement of its claim or to waive the claim.
(2) An Accounting officer shall ensure that all losses written Off are done in accordance
with this Act, these Regulations or any other relevant legislation.
Interest payable on recoverable losses.
151. Interest may be charged on recoverable losses arising from cases of losses reported
to the county government at the Central Bank Rate.
Right of the Auditor-General.
152. The authorization of disposal of a case of loss does not prejudice the right of the
Auditor-General to carry out further investigation.
PART XIII – INTERNAL AUDIT AND AUDIT COMMITTEES
Mandate of internal auditors.
153. Internal auditors shall—
(a) review and evaluate budgetary performance, financial management, transparency
and accountability mechanisms and processes in county government entities,
including County Assembly;
(b) have a duty to give reasonable assurance through the audit committee on the state
of risk management, control and governance within the organization; and
(c) review the effectiveness of the financial and non-financial performance
management systems of the entities.
Compliance with professional standards and code of ethics.
154. Internal auditors shall comply with the International Professional Practices
Framework as issued by the Institute of Internal Auditors from time to time and shall conduct
audits in accordance with policies and guidelines issued by the Public Sector Accounting
Standards Board to ensure uniformity and consistency across county government.
Independence of the internal auditor.
155. (1) The Head of Internal Audit unit in a county government entity shall enjoy
operational independence through the reporting structure by reporting administratively to
the Accounting Officer and functionally to the Audit Committee.
(2) An Accounting Officer shall ensure that the organizational structure of the internal
audit unit facilitate—
(a) the entity to accomplish its internal audit responsibilities;

-- 499 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 501
[Subsidiary]
(b) internal auditor with sufficient authority to promote independence and to ensure
broad internal audit coverage, adequate consideration of audit reports;
(c) appropriate action to be taken on internal audit recommendations; and
(d) the internal auditor to be independent of the programs, operations and activities
he or she audits to ensure the impartiality and credibility of the audit work
undertaken.
(3) The internal auditor shall have unrestricted, direct and prompt access to all records,
officials or Personnel holding any contractual status and to all the premises and properties
of the entity.
(4) The internal auditor shall respect the confidential nature of information and shall use
such information with discretion and only in so far as it is relevant to reach an audit opinion.
(5) All internal audit activities shall remain free of influence by any element in the
organization, including matters of audit selection, scope, procedures, frequency, timing,
or report content to permit maintenance of an independent and objective mental attitude
necessary in rendering reports.
(6) Internal Auditors shall have no direct operational responsibility or authority over
any of the activities they review. Accordingly, they shall not develop nor install systems or
procedures, prepare records, or engage in any other activity which would normally be audited.
THE COUNTY HEAD OF INTERNAL AUDIT SERVICES OF THE COUNTY TREASURY
Independence of County Head of Internal Audit services.
156. The County Head of Internal Audit Services shall be an office in the County Treasury.
Functions of County Head of Internal Audit services.
157. The County Head of Internal Audit Services, in leading the internal audit function
within the County Treasury, is responsible for operational aspects of internal audit function
within the county government entities including—
(a) advising the County Executive Committee Member and the Chief Officer on
emerging issues in internal auditing;
(b) developing and implementing the use of innovative approaches in performing
independent assessment of systems, controls and efficiencies guided by
professional standards;
(c) promoting county government-wide risk management and provide the
management with consulting services to improve the overall county government
operations;
(d) providing capacity building for county government entities including developing
curriculum, training materials and undertake training for audit committees; and
(e) reporting annually to the County Treasury on the internal audit function
performance.
The role of Accounting Officer in risk management.
158. The Accounting Officer shall ensure that—
(a) the county government entity develops risk management strategies, which include
fraud prevention mechanism; and
(b) the county government entity develops a system of risk management and internal
control that builds robust business operations.

-- 500 of 625 --

502 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Performance appraisal.
159. (1) Each year the head of internal audit unit shall assess its own effectiveness through
an internal performance appraisal and shall carry out annual review of the performance of
the internal audit activity commenting on its effectiveness in the annual report to County
Treasury.
(2) Each year the Audit Committee shall carry out annual review of the independence,
performance and competency of the internal audit unit and comment on their effectiveness
in the annual report.
(3) At least once every three years, but not more than five years, internal audit unit
shall undergo a professional assessment of its effectiveness undertaken by a professionally
recognized body or institution.
Reporting material breaches and persistent material breaches.
160. (1) When indications of fraud, material breaches and wasteful expenditure have been
identified in a county government entity in accordance with section 92 of the Act, the head of
the internal audit unit shall immediately notify the County Executive Committee Member.
(2) The County Executive Committee Member may notify the Cabinet Secretary of the
findings of paragraph (1) in this regulation with a copy to the Auditor-General.
Prohibition from conducting assurance services.
161. An internal auditor shall not perform audit assignments for providing assurance
relating to activities and structures on which he or she has provided consulting services or in
which he or she had been employed over in the last twenty four months.
Disciplinary liability on internal auditors.
162. Heads of internal audit and the internal auditors shall bear legal and disciplinary
liability for failure to discharge their responsibilities under the Act and these Regulations:
Provided that assurance procedures alone even when performed with due professional care
shall not be a guarantee that all significant risk shall be identified.
INTERNAL AUDIT PLANNING, PERFORMANCE AND REPORTING
Risk based audit assessment strategic plan.
163. (1) Internal audit planning shall be carried out on the basis of risk assessment and
shall be set out in a three-year strategic plan, on the basis of which an annual internal audit
activity plan shall be developed.
(2) The annual work plan developed in paragraph (1) shall be—
(a) submitted to the audit committee by 15th February each financial year; and
(b) approved by the audit committee and shared with the Accounting Officer of that
entity, in sufficient time for inclusion in the budget of that entity.
Communicating results.
164. (1) The findings and recommendations arising from each internal audit assignment
shall be promptly reported to the accounting officer.
(2) The final report, including the actions taken by the accounting officer should be
reported to the audit committee in a format to be gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary.

-- 501 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 503
[Subsidiary]
(3) When updating the management of the progress of an audit assignment, the internal
auditor shall—
(a) give an oral preliminary report which shall be confirmed in writing within seven
(7) days;
(b) discuss the findings, conclusions and recommendations with the auditee;
(c) issue a signed written report after each internal audit assignment that is objective,
clear, concise and timely;
(d) give reports which clearly present the purpose, scope and results of the audit; and
(e) give reports with recommendations for potential improvement, suggestions of
corrective actions and acknowledgement of satisfactory performance.
IMPLEMENTATION OF AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS
Enforcement of Internal Audit recommendations.
165. (1) The accounting officer of the concerned entity shall be responsible for the
implementation of the recommendations made in the audit reports and shall develop
response and action plan which they shall submit to the chairperson of the audit committee
within fourteen days.
(2) The response and action plan submitted to chairperson of internal audit committee
in paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be followed up to ensure its implementation.
Preparation and submission of quarterly and annual audit reports.
166. (1) Each head of internal audit unit shall prepare a quarterly internal audit report
which shall cover areas provided for in guidelines and shall be in a format issued by the Cabinet
Secretary.
(2) The quarterly report in paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be submitted within 14
days of the end of the quarter to the Accounting Officer of the concerned entity, the Audit
Committee and the County Treasury.
(3) At the end of each financial year, the County Head of Internal Audit Services shall
prepare for the county government clear and comprehensible annual report that consolidates
the quarterly audit assurance reports prepared by all internal audit units activities in county
government entities, in accordance with formats prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting
Standards Board.
AUDIT COMMITTEES
Establishment of audit committees.
167. (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this regulation, each county government entity shall
have an audit committee.
(2) The County Treasury, where deemed necessary, may approve the sharing of one audit
committee by two or more county government entities.
(3) In the case of a shared audit committee referred to in paragraph (2) of this regulation,
the appointing authorities of the concerned entities shall jointly appoint the chairperson and
members of the joint audit committee in consultation with the County Treasury.
(4) There shall be a minimum of three members, excluding a person who shall be
appointed to represent the County Treasury in each audit committee and a maximum of five
of whom at least two shall be from recognized professional bodies.

-- 502 of 625 --

504 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(5) The chairperson of an audit committee shall be independent to the County government
entities, be knowledgeable of the organization, have the requisite business and leadership
skills and shall not be a political office holder.
(6) In addition to paragraph (5) of this regulation, majority of members appointed to the
audit committee shall not be past or present employees of the entity, and shall not have served
as an employee or agent of a business organization which has carried out any business with
the concerned entity in the last two years.
(7) All members of an audit committee shall—
(a) hold a first degree in relevant field from a recognized university;
(b) have a good understanding of county government operating, financial reporting or
auditing; and
(c) have a good understanding of the objects, principles and functions of the entity to
which they are to be appointed.
(8) Each accounting officer of a county government entity shall ensure that, the audit
committee is adequately funded and supported.
(9) The chairperson of an audit committee shall not serve concurrently as a member of
any other committee of the concerned county government entity, however its members can
serve in up to a maximum of three audit committees at the same time.
(10) The Public Sector Accounting Standards Board shall prescribe guidelines for
appointment of audit committees to be approved and gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary.
[L.N. 230/2015, r. 7.]
Duties of the audit committees.
168. The main function of the audit committee shall be to—
(a) support the accounting officers with regard to their responsibilities for issues of
risk, control and governance and associated assurance:
Provided that the responsibility over the management of risk, control and
governance processes remains with the management of the concerned county
government entity; and
(b) follow up on the implementation of the recommendations of internal and external
auditors.
Composition of audit committees.
169. (1) The Accounting Officer of a county government entity shall not be a member of
the audit committee, but shall attend meetings of the audit committee by the invitation of
the chairperson of the committee.
(2) Audit Committee members shall be persons of integrity and in compliance with the
requirements of Chapter six of the Constitution.
Terms of appointment.
170. (1) Members of audit committees shall be appointed, for a term of three years and
shall be eligible for re-appointment for a further one term only.
(2) Despite the provision of paragraph (1) of this regulation, after expiry of every term, at
least one third of the committee shall retire and not be eligible for re-appointment.
(3) The roles and responsibilities of the audit committee shall be laid out in the guidelines
issued by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.

-- 503 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 505
[Subsidiary]
Vacancy of office.
171. (1) A person shall cease to be a member of an audit committee if—
(a) that person is convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not less than six months; or
(b) that person is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the committee
without leave of absence; or
(c) that person resigns, in writing, from the audit committee; or
(d) that persons' term of office expires; or
(e) that person ceases to be a member by virtue of withdrawal of his or her nomination
to the board by the nominating institution; or
(f) that person becomes an employee or officer of the concerned entity; or
(g) that person is discovered to have a conflict of interest as described in his or her
letter of appointment at the time of his or her appointment and failed to disclose
it; or
(h) the audit committee is disbanded.
(2) The County Treasury shall be informed of any contemplated termination of the
services of a person serving on an audit committee for its concurrence.
FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
Meetings of the audit committee.
172. (1) The audit committee shall meet at least once in every three months.
(2) Each member of the audit committee shall have one vote.
(3) The audit committee shall make decisions by resolution
(4) In the event of a tie vote, the chair shall be entitled to cast a second vote.
(5) A majority of the members of the audit committee that includes at least fifty percent
plus one member shall constitute a quorum for the meetings of the committee.
(6) The chair of the audit committee shall—
(a) ensure that minutes are taken at each meeting and provided to the members of the
Committee before the next meeting;
(b) have access to management, the head of internal audit and external auditors; and
(c) send or cause to be sent—
(i) notice of audit committee meetings at least fourteen days before the
meeting; and
(ii) all minutes of audit committee meetings.
(7) If at any meeting of the audit committee the chair is not present, the members shall
elect a chair for purposes of conducting that meeting.
Code of conduct.
173. Any code of conduct of public officers shall also apply to members of the audit
committee in relations to their functions, powers and duties as members of the committee.

-- 504 of 625 --

506 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Remuneration and compensation.
174. (1) Members of the audit committee shall be paid an allowance on account of
attendance of audit committee meetings as determined by County Treasury in consultation
with other relevant entities.
(2) A county government entity shall reimburse members of its audit committee for
expenses incurred while attending to audit committee duties.
Capacity building for audit committees.
175. The accounting officer shall—
(a) provide capacity building to all public county government entity audit committees;
(b) provide policies and guidelines on audit committees;
(c) monitor the effectiveness of audit committees; and
(d) provide periodic updates of audit committee activities through the website.
PART XIV – PUBLIC DEBT MANAGEMENT
Guiding principles for county government borrowing.
176. County government borrowing shall be guided by the following principles—
(a) need to ensure stability of domestic financial markets;
(b) promotion of inter-generational equity in the sharing of burdens and benefits of
public borrowing;
(c) determination of thresholds of borrowing rights for both levels of government;
(d) use of objective criteria for evaluating county government eligibility for national
government debt guarantee; and
(e) prudence and equity in setting limits for debt stock levels for each county
government.
Borrowing powers for county governments.
177. (1) The County Executive Committee Member derives powers to raise loans for the
County Government from section 140 of the Act.
(2) A county government may from time to time borrow within and outside Kenya such
sums of money in such amount and on such terms and conditions as to interest, repayment,
disbursement or otherwise as the County Executive Committee Member may think fit, in any
of the following manners—
(a) by issuing County Treasury bonds;
(b) by bank overdraft facility from the Central Bank of Kenya; and
(c) by any other loan or credit evidenced by instruments in writing.
(3) Any borrowing by a county government under paragraph (2) (a) and (c) of this
regulation shall require a national government guarantee pursuant to section 58 of the Act.
(4) Any borrowing under paragraph (2) (b) of this regulation, shall be in accordance with
section 142 of the Act and shall be deemed guaranteed by the Cabinet Secretary and that
guarantee shall be secured by the county equitable share of the revenue raised nationally.

-- 505 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 507
[Subsidiary]
Borrowing Purposes.
178. The county governments may borrow in pursuant to the requirements of sections
140 of the Act for the purpose of—
(a) financing county government budget deficits; or
(b) cash management; or
(c) refinancing outstanding debt or repaying a loan prior to its date of repayment; or
(d) mitigation against adverse effects caused by an urgent and unforeseen event in
cases where the Emergency Fund has been depleted; or
(e) meeting any other development policy objectives that the County Executive
Committee Member shall deem necessary, consistent with the law, and as County
Assembly may approve.
County total public debt threshold.
179. (1) Pursuant to section 50(5) of the Act, a county public debt shall not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the county government's most recent audited revenues, as approved
by county assembly.
(2) The annual debt service cost of a county government shall not exceed fifteen (15%)
percent of the most recent audited revenue of that county government, as approved by county
assembly.
(3) Parliament may review the limit under paragraph (1) of this regulation five years after
the commencement date of these Regulations.
Setting Debt Limit in the County Medium Term Debt Management Strategy.
180. (1) Pursuant to Section 141 (2) of the Act, 2012, the debt limit at any given time
shall not exceed the nominal value of the total county public debt that is determined county
assembly within the limits set under Section 50(5) of the Act and in accordance with fiscal
responsibility principles under regulation 25 of these Regulations.
(2) The debt limit under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be specified annually in the
county fiscal strategy paper and the medium term debt management strategy paper.
(3) The annual new government debt shall be consistent with the debt limits set out under
paragraph (1) of this regulation.
(4) For the purposes of monitoring compliance with the limits under paragraph (1), the
amount of county government debts which are not denominated in Kenya shillings shall be
recalculated at the prevailing exchange rate of the Central Bank of Kenya.
Eligibility and evaluation criteria for guarantee requests by county government.
181. (1) Pursuant to the provisions of section 58 of the Act, the capital project
expenditures of county governments for which a guarantee for issuance of domestic
government security is requested, shall meet the following requirements—
(a) the county government shall demonstrate that the project could not be financed
on reasonable terms and conditions without a county government loan;
(b) an economic analysis is made demonstrating the projects cash flow clearly setting
out a borrowing and repayment plan;
(c) it is a feasible project that has been approved by the county 'government entity as
may be required by county legislation;

-- 506 of 625 --

508 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(d) the county government meets all the fiscal responsibility principles set out in the
Act and these Regulations;
(e) the borrowing shall be for financing a devolved function capital project; and
(f) any other requirements as the Cabinet Secretary may prescribe in the gazette.
(2) Pursuant to the provisions of section 58 of the Act, the capital project expenditures
of county governments for which a guarantee is requested, shall meet the following
requirements—
(a) the county government shall demonstrate that the project could not be financed
on reasonable terms and conditions without a government loan;
(b) provide the projected cash flow clearly setting out a projected disbursement
Schedule and repayment plan;
(c) the county government shall contribute a substantial portion of project funds from
their own resources and in any case not less than fifteen (15) percent;
(d) a county government that defaults on a loan shall not be eligible for a loan
guarantee and shall only be eligible upon successful completion a financial
recovery programme agreed by the County Treasury and National Treasury;
(e) it is a feasible project that has been approved by the county government entity as
may be required by national or county legislation;
(f) the application of the guarantee shall be submitted with a signed loan agreement
but only for loans on concessional terms in the case of external loans;
(g) any county government applying for a national government guarantee shall meet
all the fiscal responsibility principles set out in the Act and these Regulations
unless exempted under certain conditions by the Cabinet Secretary;
(h) the borrowing shall be financing a devolved function capital project in line with
the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution;
(i) the lender is of good credibility and standing with the Government of Kenya;
(j) the guarantee is in the public interest; and
(k) any other guidelines as Cabinet Secretary may prescribe in the gazette.
Criteria for issuance of county government securities.
182. (1) The issuance of county government securities to raise debt capital shall be by
way of auction or such other method as County Executive Committee Member may determine
with the concurrence of the Cabinet Secretary.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) of this regulation, the auction of domestic
county government securities shall take into account the following factors—
(a) pricing of the domestic county government securities;
(b) refinancing risk of the domestic county government securities;
(c) the domestic market stability when taking up domestic county government
securities; and
(d) the borrowing programme which is consistent with the county medium term debt
strategy and county fiscal strategy paper.

-- 507 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 509
[Subsidiary]
Process of issuance of Treasury Bonds on behalf of county governments.
183. (1) Pursuant to section 144 of the Act, a county government which intends to issue
a Treasury Bond shall be guided by the following procedures—
(a) before seeking the national government guarantee, the County Executive
Committee Member for finance shall develop and submit the cash plan, indicating
the borrowing requirements to the County Executive Committee for approval of
the borrowing including its terms and conditions;
(b) after approval by the County Executive Committee, the County Executive
Committee Member shall submit the cash plan referred to above to the County
Assembly for approval of the borrowing including its terms and conditions;
(c) upon approval by the County Assembly, the County Executive Committee Member
shall submit the final cash plan and the approval of the County Assembly to the
Cabinet Secretary requesting for the guarantee of the Treasury Bond and their
inclusion in the issuance calendar;
(d) the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury, after receiving the request from
the county government, shall seek the recommendations of the Intergovernmental
Budget and Economic Council in fulfillment of the requirements of section 58(2)
(i) of the Act;
(e) the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury may, upon taking into account
the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council,
approve or reject the request;
(f) the Cabinet Secretary shall reject a request for loan guarantee with reasons and
communicate the same to the concerned County Executive Member;
(g) upon approval of a loan guarantee request, the Cabinet Secretary to the National
Treasury shall submit the request to Parliament with recommendations seeking its
approval;
(h) the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury shall communicate the decision
of Parliament on the draft loan guarantee to the respective County Executive
Committee Member for finance;
(i) upon approval by Parliament, the Cabinet Secretary shall include such authorized
Treasury Bonds in the overall national issuance calendar;
(j) once the issuance calendar is known, when the national governments advertises
its bond issuance for a specific month it shall also incorporate those to be issued
on behalf of county governments;
(k) on the issuance day, the county whose bond is being issued, shall be represented
in the auction committee meeting by the County Executive Committee Member or
his or her representative; and
(l) after the National Treasury and the county government sign an on-lending
agreement, the National Treasury shall transfer the proceeds of the Treasury Bond
to the Revenue Fund of that county government and such on-lending transactions
shall attract a fee to be determined by the National Treasury.
(2) The cash plan prepared under paragraph (1) above shall indicate—
(a) financing amounts from the issuance of Treasury Bond;
(b) the timing of the bond issuance;

-- 508 of 625 --

510 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) redemption and interest payment of previously issued Treasury Bonds plus the
interest payment of the intended Treasury Bond; and
(d) the county government's cash plan to be integrated into the national government
borrowing program to prepare the market for issuance.
Process for applying for a national government guarantee for external borrowing.
184. (1) Pursuant to the provisions of section 58 of the Act and before a county
government seeks a guarantee from the national government, the following requirements
shall be met—
(a) the County Executive Committee member for finance shall submit the borrowing
proposal to the County Executive Committee for approval of the borrowing
including its terms and conditions;
(b) after approval by the County Executive Committee, the County Executive
Committee member for finance shall submit the signed loan agreement and a
sessional paper to the County Assembly for approval of the borrowing, including
its broad terms and conditions;
(c) after obtaining the approval of the County Assembly, the County Executive
Committed member for finance shall submit the final draft loan financing
agreement and the approval of the County Assembly to the Cabinet Secretary
requesting for the guarantee of the final loan financing agreement;
(d) the Cabinet Secretary, after receiving the request from the county government,
shall seek the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic
Council in fulfillment of the requirements of section 58(2)(i) of the Act;
(e) the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury, after receiving recommendations
of IBEC, shall seek the recommendations of the Attorney-General;
(f) the Cabinet Secretary may, upon taking into account the recommendations of
the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council and the Attorney-General,
approve or reject the request;
(g) the Cabinet Secretary shall reject a request for loan guarantee with reasons and
communicate the same to the concerned County Executive Member for finance;
(h) upon approval of a loan guarantee request, the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a
sessional paper to Parliament with recommendations seeking its approval;
(i) the Cabinet Secretary shall communicate the decision of Parliament on the draft
loan guarantee to the respective County Executive Committee Member for finance;
and
(j) upon approval by Parliament the Cabinet Secretary shall issue a loan guarantee.
(2) After receiving the communication of the decision of Parliament on the draft loan
guarantee, the County Executive Committee member shall report to the County Assembly of
the decision.
Use of moneys borrowed and credits obtained.
185. All sums borrowed under the Act shall be expended only on the activities included
in the approved estimates of expenditure of the county government entities.
Objectives of county public debt management.
186. The objectives of public debt management are to ensure that the county government's
financing needs and payment obligations are met at the lowest possible cost over the medium
to long term, with a prudent degree of risk, and to promote development of the domestic debt

-- 509 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 511
[Subsidiary]
market while ensuring the equitable sharing of benefits and burdens of public debt between
the current and future generation.
County government medium term debt management strategy.
187. (1) Any borrowing by the county government shall be informed by the county
government medium term debt management strategy and shall set out the framework for the
management of county public debt.
(2) The medium term debt management strategy, which is reviewed annually, shall be
prepared and executed by the County Treasury.
(3) Medium term debt management strategy shall be formulated annually on a three year
rolling basis.
(4) The Strategy shall be approved by the County Executive Committee.
(5) The county medium term debt management strategy shall be prepared taking into
account—
(a) the borrowing needs of the county governments;
(b) fiscal responsibility principles set out in section 107 of the Act and regulation 25
of these Regulations;
(c) prevailing macro-economic conditions;
(d) prevailing conditions of the financial markets; and
(e) any other relevant factors.
(6) The county medium term debt management strategy shall include measures for
minimising borrowing costs with a prudent degree of risks.
Annual county government borrowing programme.
188. (1) The county medium term debt management strategy shall be implemented
through the annual county government borrowing programme for each fiscal year.
(2) The annual borrowing programme shall include issuance of county government
securities, external guaranteed loans and disbursements for the fiscal year and show indicative
dates of such issuance and disbursements.
Formalization of agreements for loans.
189. Negotiation with foreign governments and agencies for external loans shall
culminate into and shall be formalized into one of the following recognized instruments in
addition to the national government guarantee—
(a) loan agreements; or
(b) exchange of letters that constitute an agreement; or
(c) subscription statement in regard to domestic government securities; or
(d) national government guarantee.
Modes of payment (disbursement) of loan funds.
190. The procedure to be followed in the disbursement of loan funds shall be defined in
the respective agreement and shall generally assume one or more of the following methods—
(a) credit purchase; or
(b) direct disbursement to the County Revenue Fund; or

-- 510 of 625 --

512 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) reimbursement, where the county government pays for goods and services supplied
and later on claim reimbursement from the financier.
Credit purchases.
191. Where development partner have opted to give loans through credit purchase or
commodity loan arrangements, for the purposes of budgeting and accounting, the following
procedures shall be followed—
(a) the amount of expenditure and matching direct payment as agreed and as
applicable, shall be included in the development estimates under separate items;
(b) accounting officer shall apply through the County Treasury for utilisation of the
credit purchase facility in the prescribed manner as set-out in the loan instrument;
(c) after supplying goods or services, the development partner shall notify County
Treasury of the amount disbursed against the loan;
(d) the County Treasury shall record the amounts disbursed as a drawing against each
loan facility;
(e) the County Treasury shall forward invoices and debit advices to the accounting
officer concerned to bring the expenditure involved into account;
(f) the accounting officer shall, on satisfying herself or himself of receipt of goods and
services, record the transactions in the stores ledger card and the accounting officer
shall notify the County Treasury on the receipt of goods and services; and
(g) upon receipts of the notification under paragraph (f) of this regulation, the County
Treasury shall notify the Cabinet Secretary of the receipt of goods and services.
Redemption, conversion and consolidation of loans.
192. The County Executive Committee Member may, on such terms and conditions as
he or she may determine, and when necessary, with the concurrence of the lender and the
Cabinet Secretary—
(a) repay any loan prior to the redemption date of that loan; or
(b) convert the loan into any other loan; or
(c) consolidate two or more loans into an existing or new loan.
County government entities to provide data on debt.
193. A County Treasury shall submit to the National Treasury a report on county public
debt as prescribed in these Regulations.
County annual debt reporting.
194. (1) Not later than three months after the end of each financial year, the County
Executive Committee Member shall prepare and submit an annual report to the county
assembly on public debt.
(2) The annual public debt report shall be in the format gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary
and shall include the following information—
(a) review of previous year's financing of budget deficit;
(b) composition of domestic debt;
(c) composition of external debt;
(d) on-lent loans and contingent liabilities;

-- 511 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 513
[Subsidiary]
(e) debt strategy and debt sustaimbility;
(f) outlook for the medium term; and
(g) any commitment fees and penalties paid on any undisbursed amounts of a loan.
(3) The County Treasury shall maintain an inventory of all loans made to the county
government and make the record available to the county assembly within seven days of
request.
(4) The following information shall be included in the inventory under paragraph 3 of this
regulation—
(a) the principal of the loan and the terms and conditions of the loan, including
interest and other charges payable and terms of repayment and location of the
project financed; and
(b) the amount of the loan advanced at any particular time.
Roles and responsibilities of accounting officers in debt management operations and loan
administration.
195. For the purposes of debt management operations and loan administration, the
accounting officers of a county government entity shall be responsible for the following—
(a) preparing project proposals and submitting them for approval to the County
Treasury;
(b) where authorisation has been granted for the project to start, the accounting officer
shall ensure public disclosure to intended beneficiaries within thirty days of the
allocation and disbursement of the loan;
(c) after disbursement of loans, the loan recipient accounting officer shall report
within fifteen days after the end of each quarter to the intended beneficiaries on
the expenditures and performance achieved in relation to the loan;
(d) during the project identification and design, the intended beneficiaries shall be
involved through the public participatory approach to planning through public
forums to enhance leadership, ownership, social accountability and sustainability
of the project;
(e) preparing expected disbursements profiles;
(f) submitting loan disbursement claims for approval by the County Treasury;
(g) making comments on draft loan agreement from the County Treasury;
(h) participating in all consultations and negotiations of all loan agreements for
projects and programmes under their jurisdiction; and
(i) implementing, monitoring and evaluating, in close collaboration with the county
government entity responsible for county planning, all projects and programmes
within their jurisdiction.
Default of payment of guaranteed loan.
196. In case of default of payment of a guaranteed loan by a county government, the
provisions of section 61 and 94 of the Act shall apply.

-- 512 of 625 --

514 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
PART XV – PUBLIC FUNDS
Criteria for the establishment of a county public fund.
197. (1) The establishment of a county public Fund shall at the minimum meet the
following requirements—
(a) be initiated through a proposal by the County Executive Committee Member
responsible for the county government entity under which the functions of the
Fund fall, clearly setting out the justifications and submit it to the County
Executive Committee Member;
(b) the County Executive Committee Member responsible for the county government
entity shall certify in writing that the functions and the public services to be
delivered through the Fund cannot be delivered through the structure of budget
appropriations;
(c) provide a clear justification as to why a Fund structure is deemed appropriate for
improved service delivery in light of the legislative and policy mandate of the
county government entity;
(d) the administration costs of the Fund shall be a maximum of three (3%) percent of
the approved budgets of the Fund;
(e) the County Executive Committee Member responsible for the county government
entity functions shall confirm in writing that the establishment of the Fund and
its continued existence will not depend on annual financing from the county
exchequer;
(f) a Fund that has a lifespan of less than two years shall not be approved unless it is
for unforeseen and urgent need;
(g) the County Executive Committee Member shall grant approval in writing before
establishment of the Fund;
(h) the County Executive Committee Member responsible for the entity shall
demonstrate how the activities of the proposed County Public Fund will fit in the
overall Medium Term Plan and County Fiscal Strategy Paper; and
(i) the initial approval for establishment of a county public Fund shall be for a
maximum period of ten (10) years, beyond which the County Executive Committee
and County Assembly approvals shall be sought.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) of this regulation, the County Executive
Committee Member may from time to time issue further guidelines on the establishment of
county public Funds.
Management and winding up of a county public fund.
198. The County Executive Committee Member shall provide for the management,
operation and winding up procedure in the guidelines for establishing each Fund which shall
be in accordance with the Act and these Regulations.
Winding up of a county public Fund.
199. (1) Where the lifespan of a Fund lapses, the process of winding up shall commence
within six (6) months from the date of the lapse.
(2) The final report after winding up the Fund shall be submitted to the Auditor-General
for audit and the County Assembly.

-- 513 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 515
[Subsidiary]
(3) A county public Fund may also be dissolved if the County Executive Committee
Member responsible for a department operating a county public Fund considers that the
county public Fund has successfully completed the specific objective for which it was created.
PART XVI – COUNTY CORPORATIONS
Definitions.
200. For the purposes of this Part—
"governing body" in relation to a public entity means a commission, a board of directors,
a board of trustees, board of governors, and council.
"government owned enterprise" means an organisation which—
(a) is a legal person under the ownership and control of a county government;
(b) has been assigned financial and operational powers to carry on a business activity;
(c) as its main business, supplies goods or services in accordance with ordinary
commercial principles; and
(d) is financed wholly or substantially from sources that do not require annual
appropriation by County Assembly, or imposition of a tax, levy or other charge
under legislation.
Declaration of County government entities and classification of state corporation.
201. (1) Pursuant to section 5 of the Act, the County Committee Member may by notice in
the Gazette declare and classify county government entities in accordance with the Schedules
as indicated in this Regulation.
(2) County Government owned enterprises operating on the basis of commercial
principles shall be listed as Schedule 2 county government entities.
(3) Regulatory agencies shall be categorised as Schedule 3 county government entities.
(4) Executive agencies, and county referral health institutions, boards and commissions
fully or partially funded through the county government budget shall be categorised as
Schedule 4 county government entities.
(5) County Public Funds established under the county legislation or subsidiary county
legislation shall be classified as Schedule 5 county government entities.
(6) The County Executive Committee Member for Finance shall have powers to amend the
Schedules classified under this regulation in accordance with the provisions of the Act and
this regulation.
Guiding principles for the establishment of county corporations.
202. The following principles shall apply when determining the need for the
establishment of a county corporation under section 182 of the Act—
(a) there shall be a role for a county government entity to fill a gap left by the market
forces through—
(i) social inclusion, where the county government entity addresses social
inequity by redistributing resources in ways that improve opportunity
and support for individuals, families and communities, allowing them
to participate in the economy and society consistent with the county
government's social inclusion agenda; or
(ii) correction of market failure, where the county government entity's activity
shall address market failures by improving social and economic welfare

-- 514 of 625 --

516 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
through improved resource allocation, where the benefits of county
government intervention outweigh its cost;
(b) activities promoted by the county corporation shall have clear and consistent
objectives and be effective in achieving their county objectives and represent value
for money for the expenditure of taxpayer funds;
(c) a county government owned enterprise shall operate on commercial principles
and with a defined commercial income stream that substantially supports the
associated commercial activities;
(d) where activities involving tax expenditures demonstrate that public expenditure is
less effective in achieving the county government objective but can effectively be
undertaken on a commercial basis; and
(e) there is no overlap or duplication of functions when establishing a county
corporation within the county government.
Criteria for establishing county corporations.
203. (1) In exercising the powers under section 182 of the Act, the County Executive
Committee and County Assembly shall be guided by regulation 202, this regulation and any
other relevant regulation of these Regulations.
(2) A County corporation may be established only with the prior approval of the County
Executive Committee, with reference to a legislation enacted to govern the establishment,
management and dissolution of such county corporation.
(3) In order to establish a county corporation or a subsidiary of a county corporation—
(a) the responsible County Executive Committee Member shall submit a written
business case to the County Executive Committee Member, with detailed
justification for establishing the county corporation or the subsidiary; and
(b) the business case in paragraph 3(a) shall be informed by a feasibility assessment of
the proposed county corporation or the subsidiary for the purpose of ascertaining—
(i) the economic and financial viability of establishing a county corporation;
(ii) whether the proposed activity cannot be conducted through an existing
corporation or the parent department;
(iii) whether or not there is need to establish a new corporation;
(iv) the functions and objective that its establishment is supposed to attain;
(v) how the activities of the proposed corporation will fit in the county
department's legislative mandate and medium term strategy, and aid the
realization of the objectives of the programmes associated with that
department;
(vi) how the activities of the proposed county corporation will fit in the overall
medium term plan of county government;
(vii) how they impact the fiscal position of the county government; and
(viii) the amount of county government share.
(4) The feasibility and viability assessment conducted under paragraph (3)(b) of this
regulation shall be submitted to the County Executive Committee for approval.
(5) Upon approval of the business case by the County Executive Committee, the necessary
establishment processes shall be undertaken by the relevant department as required by a
legislation on formation, management and dissolution of County corporations to allow it
perform the functions stipulated in the instruments for incorporation.

-- 515 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 517
[Subsidiary]
(6) The county government entity responsible for investment portfolio management in
the County Treasury shall be constantly updated on the progress of a county corporation.
(7) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for investment portfolio
management in the County Treasury shall conduct regular review of county corporation
to assess the relevance of the mandate and the justification for their continued existence
and where necessary make recommendations to the County Executive Committee for the
dissolution or merger of corporations.
Dissolution of County corporations.
204. (1) A County corporation may be dissolved only with the prior approval of the County
Executive Committee, with reference to a legislation enacted to govern the establishment,
management and dissolution of such county corporation.
(2) Subject to the provisions of a legislation enacted for the formation, management and
dissolution of a county corporation, a county corporation may be dissolved—
(a) upon expiry of the lifespan of the county corporation as may be defined in the
instrument of establishment;
(b) where a county corporation has carried out the mandate for which it was created;
(c) upon reorganization of the corporation and associated government functions; and
(d) upon a merger of the corporation with another.
(3) The accounting officer responsible for the corporation in question shall follow-up
implementation of the findings and eventual recommendations for dissolution to ensure
compliance.
(4) The County Executive Committee member may by notice in the gazette prescribe
guidelines for dissolution and mergers of county corporations.
(5) Upon approval by County Executive Committee of the recommendations to dissolve
or merge a county corporation, the County Executive Committee Member shall cause the
dissolution or merge the corporation with another.
(6) Upon dissolution of a county corporation, the funds corresponding to county
government equity in the county corporation shall be deposited into the County Revenue
Fund.
(7) Upon ceasing of an entity to be a public entity, the County Executive Committee
Member shall vest all the assets and liabilities of the county government entity concerned to
the responsible county government entity.
(8) No county corporation shall vest its assets in another entity without prior approval of
the County Executive Committee Member.
Annual budget.
205. (1) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for the county corporation
shall approve the estimates of budget of the county corporation and shall, not later than end
of January every year, submit to the County Treasury for approval of those estimates for the
following financial year.
(2) The National Treasury shall provide guidelines and the format on which the budget
shall be prepared
(3) Budget estimates submitted under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be classified
as follows—
(a) compensation of employees;

-- 516 of 625 --

518 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) use of goods and services;
(c) transfers to other levels of government; and
(d) capital.
Dividend policy and surplus funds.
206. (1) The County Treasury shall prepare and issue dividend policy guidelines on how
county government entities shall declare and remit dividends and surplus funds to the County
Treasury.
(2) A regulatory authority established by an Act of Parliament and referred to under
regulation, shall remit into County Revenue Fund, ninety per centum of its surplus funds
reported in the audited financial statements after the end of each financial year.
(3) A regulatory authority to which this section applies shall be exempt from the income
tax.
(4) The governing body of a public entity listed in Schedule 2 referred to under regulation
201(2), shall formulate an appropriate dividend policy in line with the policy guidelines
referred under paragraph (1) of this regulation, and submit to the National Treasury and the
respective County Treasury.
Quarterly reporting by county corporations.
207. (1) An accounting officer of a county corporation shall prepare and submit quarterly
financial and non-financial statements in the format gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary within
15 days after the end of each quarter to the County Executive Committee Member responsible
for the county corporation with a copy to the County Treasury and the Auditor-General.
(2) The quarterly reports prepared under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall include
information on—
(a) revenue, including funding from grants;
(b) expenditure;
(c) borrowing, including any outstanding loan arrears; and
(d) amount of profit or loss of the county corporation for the quarter.
Annual financial statements.
208. Pursuant to section 165(5) of the Act, the accounting officer for a county corporation
shall prepare and submit annual financial and non-financial statements in the format
gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary within three months after the end of the financial year to
the Auditor-General with copies to the responsible County Executive Committee member and
the County Treasury.
PART XVII – COUNTY BUDGET AND ECONOMIC FORUM
The role of County Budget and Economic Forum.
209. (1) For certainty, County Budget and Economic Forums established under section
137 of the Act, shall consult on—
(a) national and county government policies and legislations relating to planning and
financial matters affecting county government interests;
(b) matters arising from Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council and other
intergovernmental forums;
(c) consult on planning and financial matters relating to cities and urban areas
affecting the county government; and

-- 517 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 519
[Subsidiary]
(d) any other matter as may be referred to the forum by the Governor.
(2) The forum shall meet at least twice a year and the Governor shall decide the time and
agenda for the meeting of the forum in consultation with other members of the forum.
(3) The forum may determine its own rules and procedures in such a manner as it considers
appropriate.
(4) The forum may invite other persons with relevant expertise to attend any of its
meetings.
(5) The County Treasury shall provide secretarial services to forum for effective
performance of its functions.
PART XVIII – COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
Offences of financial misconduct.
210. A public officer employed by a county government or a county government entity
commits an offence of financial misconduct if, without lawful authority, the officer—
(a) issues public government securities, or varies their terms and conditions; or
(b) opens a bank account in the name of the government; or
(c) lends money on behalf of the government; or
(d) issues guarantees or indemnities on behalf of the county government; or
(e) issues securities for loans made to the government; or
(f) disposes of property belonging to, or under the control of that government or
entity; or
(g) fails to pay into a government bank account any public money entrusted to the
officer or received by the officer for or on behalf of that government or that entity;
or
(h) incurs expenditure or makes a commitment on behalf of that government or entity;
or
(i) incurs wasteful expenditure on behalf of that county government or entity; or
(j) fails to deliver to that government or entity a gift or donation made on a public or
official occasion in accordance with the Public Officers Ethics Act (Cap. 185B); or
(k) fails to provide any information in the officer's possession, or under the officer's
control, in relation to the financial management, financial performance, or banking
activities of that government or entity or in relation to the management or control
of an asset or liability of that government or entity when required to do so, except
where such refusal or failure is required or authorised by this Act or any other
written law; or
(l) fails to keep proper records or conceals, or wrongfully destroys, information that
is required to be recorded; or
(m) intentionally or recklessly obstructs or hinders a person while that person is acting
in the performance or exercise of the person's functions or powers under this Act; or
(n) makes any statement or declaration, or gives any information or certificate,
lawfully required by or under this Act knowing it to be false or misleading in a
material respect for the purpose of procuring for the public officer or any other
person or organisation; or

-- 518 of 625 --

520 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(o) makes improper payment of public money belonging to or entrusted to that
government or entity, or makes improper use of any public property of that
government or entity; or
(p) fails to remit revenue received contrary to the provisions of sections 158(2) of this
Act.
PART XIX – MISCELLANEOUS
Gazettement of financial accounting and reporting formats.
211. The Cabinet Secretary shall gazette the financial, accounting and reporting
formats listed for use by county governments and county government entities soon upon
commencement date of these Regulations.
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM TO THE PUBLIC FINANCE
MANAGEMENT (COUNTY GOVERNMENT) REGULATIONS
1. The Purpose of Public Finance Management (County Government) Regulations,
2015.
The purpose of these Regulations is to:
(i) to provide means of administering the powers vested in the Cabinet
Secretary for the National Treasury under the Constitution, the Act and any
other related legislation;
(ii) to harmonize and standardize their application throughout government
service in controlling and managing the finances;
(iii) to set out a standardized financial management system for use in
Government service which is capable of producing accurate and reliable
accounts free from errors, fraud and which will be useful in management
decisions and statutory reporting;
(iv) to provide for the conduct of fiscal relations between the county
governments; and
(v) to ensure accountability, transparency and the effective, economic and
efficient collection and utilization of public resources.
2. The Legislative Context
The process of developing a comprehensive PFM Regulations started in 2012 after
enactment of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A) which consolidated
all Public Finance Management legislations catering for both the National and
County Governments.
The development of the PFM Regulations was guided by the following
considerations;
(i) ensuring financial autonomy of National and County Governments within a
unitary system of government and guided by provisions in the Constitution
such as Article 6 and the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A). As

-- 519 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 521
[Subsidiary]
a result, functions of PFM institutions at the national and county levels of
government were mirrored;
(ii) ensuring the PFM Regulations encapsulates best international practices;
and
(iii) the need to separate the PFM Regulations for national and county
governments to capture the unique needs of each level of government.
These PFM Regulations, 2015 are therefore firmly anchored in Chapter 12 of the
Constitution and gives effect to the provisions of the Public Finance Management
Act (Cap. 412A).
3. Policy Background
Parliament enacted the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act (Cap. 412A) in
August, 2012 and over the past two years Kenya has been rolling out devolution as
envisaged in the Constitution. The Act on its own, however, is not sufficient since it
does not provide guidelines on all matters relating to public finance management
at the national and county levels of government. In order to provide further clarity
on various aspects of public finance management, it is therefore necessary to have
regulations.
An efficient and effective PFM system is a necessary condition for achieving Vision
2030 and our development objectives. Investors, both foreign and local, require
assurance that a country's PFM system can be relied upon to maintain fiscal
discipline and in particular contain public debt both at the National and County
level. Without a credible public financial management system, our ability to borrow
or even attract donor funds will be curtailed. In addition, an effective PFM system
is very critical in supporting the mobilization of resources to be equitably shared
between the two levels of government.
In order to make the regulations user friendly and to capture the unique needs
of the two levels of government, two volumes of Regulations have been prepared
— one for the National Government and the other for the County Governments.
The provisions of Parts I to XVI in the two sets of Regulations are largely mirrored
but tailored to each level of government. Parts XVII onwards, however, include
provisions that are specific to each level of government.
Further, them is need to ensure prudent use of public resources in line with
Article 201 of the Constitution by providing ceilings in both the Public Finance
Management Act (Cap. 412A) and PFM (County) Regulations for expenditures of
County Assemblies.
It is considered that the provisions of the proposed Public Finance Management
(County Governments) Regulations will provide a sufficient level of economic,

-- 520 of 625 --

522 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
fiscal and financial detail and adequate time for the legislatures at the National and
County Governments to perform their oversight role in an effective manner.
On the basis of the foregoing, it is considered prudent to anchor the fundamental
concepts of a modern public financial management system and its application in
Kenya in a comprehensive PFM law.
Some of the salient features of these regulations are:—
• The Regulations provide additional Fiscal responsibility principles such as—
º compensation of national and county government employees shall not exceed
35% of either level of government equitable revenue share;
º the approved expenditures of a county assembly shall not exceed seven per cent
of the total revenues of the county government or twice the personnel emoluments
of that county assembly, whichever is lower; and
º national public debt shall not exceed 50% of GDP in terms of NPV among others;
• Provides for expenditures before approval of budget estimates by national and
county assemblies under extreme circumstances;
• Provides any request for expenditures from the Emergency Fund to have a
certificate of the relevant County Executive Committee Member for Finance
confirming compliance with PFM Act provisions.
• Provides all Government Bank Accounts for County Governments will be held at
the Central Bank of Kenya except where the cabinet Secretary has expressly granted
exemption and approved.
• Provides that the Cabinet Secretary shall provide further guidelines for loans
and advances including benefits and allowances for public officers and the County
Executive Committee Members for Finance may provide further guidelines for their
respective counties in line with the Cabinet Secretaries guidelines.
• Provides for lease financing transactions by accounting officers.
Provides for equitable transfers before approval of County Allocation of Revenue
Bill.
• Provides for various thresholds for approval of losses and write-offs including
responsibility for Accounting Officers, County Executive Committee Member for
Finance, County Executive Committee and County Assembly.
• Provides for guiding principles for county government borrowing; borrowing
purposes and objectives of public debt management, the criteria for issuance of
government securities both domestic and external, sets the overall debt limit for
the country at 50% of the net present value of GDP while the debt limit for county

-- 521 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 523
[Subsidiary]
governments is set at 20% of the audited total annual revenue and approved by the
county assembly.
• Provides for establishment of a Sinking Fund for debt redemption county level
of government.
• Provides for criteria for establishment of public funds, management and winding
up of a county public fund.
• Provides the guiding principles for establishment of county corporations, criteria
for establishment of a state or county corporations as well as dissolution of county
corporations; evaluation of state or county corporation performance.
• Provides for the powers of the Cabinet Secretary to gazette financial, accounting
and reporting formats.
4. Public Consultations
The PFM Regulations have taken into account the views of key stakeholders such as
the Commission on Revenue Allocation, the Commission for the Implementation
of the Constitution, Accounting Officers, Council of Governors, County Executive
Committee Members of finance, civil society, the general public and international
and local experts on public financial management.
It is important to appreciate that one of the key recommendation from different
stakeholders was to separate the Regulations governing National and County
levels of Governments. In order to address this recommendation, the Regulations
were separated to deal each level of Government, hence the reason why we have
submitted two volumes of Public Finance Management Regulations; PFM (National
Government) Regulations and PFM (County Government) Regulations. This will
give flexibility on the application of the Regulations to each level of Government
and ensure maximum impact of the Regulations on public finance accountability
architecture.
5. Guidance
The National Treasury and County Treasuries will sensitize stakeholders including
Parliament, accounting officers of national and county governments and the
general public, on the provisions of the public finance management (County
Governments) Regulations, the accountability mechanism, the monitoring and
evaluation mechanism and the need to ensure regular reporting to Parliament and
the relevant County Assemblies.
6. Review of the Regulations
The National Treasury shall monitor the application of the PFM Regulations. This
will be done through quarterly reports sent by the relevant accounting officer
of the county government. In addition, the National and County Treasury will
also carry out regular monitoring and evaluation of the specific provisions of
these Regulations through interaction with the implementers of these Regulations,
studying various reports by Constitutional Commissions, Independent Offices,
Civil Society and the general public.
It is important to note that the Regulations shall apply to the level of government
as indicated in their headings from the commencement date of these Regulations.
In this respect, a review thereof will be done by the National Treasury with the
approval of Parliament in line with Section 205 of the Public Finance Management
Act (Cap. 412A).

-- 522 of 625 --

524 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
7. National Treasury Contact Person
The contact person at the National Treasury is the Cabinet Secretary, Mr. Henry
Rotich or the Principal Secretary, Dr. Kamau Thugge, EBS.

-- 523 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 525
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL GOVERNMENT) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Application of the Regulations.
4. Object and Purpose of the Regulations.
5. Officers to be conversant with Regulations.
6. Openness and accountability.
7. Cabinet Secretary to publish process and procedures for public participation.
8. Monetary unit, accounting and reporting currency.
9. Financial management forms and manuals.
10. Accounting responsibility not diminished by audit.
11. Responsibility for hand-over by financial officers.
12. Application of secure signatures.
13. Signing blank or blind accountability documents.
14. Restricted use of green ink.
15. Restricted use of brown ink.
16. Use of indelible ink.
PART II – CORPORATE MANAGEMENT
17. Corporate governance.
18. Establishment of Public Finance Management Standing Committees.
19. Roles and responsibilities of the standing committee.
20. Duties and responsibilities of the office of the Accountant-General.
21. Presidential warrants.
22. National Treasury warrant.
23. Responsibilities of Accounting Officers.
24. Delegation by the Accounting Officer.
25. Designation of public officers as AIE Holder.
PART III – FISCAL STRATEGY AND MACRO-ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK
26. Fiscal responsibility principles.
27. Budget Policy Statement.
28. Macroeconomic framework.
29. Contents of a fiscal framework.
30. Revisions to the fiscal framework.
PART IV – BUDGET PREPARATION
31. Responsibility for preparing annual estimates of expenditure.
32. Budget preparation process.
33. Budget guidelines.
34. Determination of budget ceilings.
35. Budget estimates audit.
36. Budget review process.
37. Provisions in Appropriation Bills.

-- 524 of 625 --

526 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
38. Vote on account.
39. Deleted.
40. Supplementary budgets estimates.
41. Budget classification and the standard chart of accounts.
PART V – BUDGET EXECUTION
42. General rules relating to budget Execution.
43. Accounting Officers to exercise budgetary control measures.
44. Accounting Officers to request cash on the basis of an approved quarterly cash
disbursement schedule.
45. Consolidation and approval of cash limit to be communicated to accounting
officers.
46. Release of funds to meet expenditure.
47. Budget Variation.
48. Budget reallocation.
49. Reallocation between programmes and sub-votes.
50. Advances from the Contingencies Fund.
51. Commitment for goods or services.
52. Vote Control Procedure.
53. Receipt of goods and services beyond the stipulated period.
54. Unauthorized spending.
55. Monthly reporting obligations by Accounting Officers.
56. Contracts with multi-year financial implications.
57. Reorganization of government functions.
PART VI – MANAGEMENT OF REVENUE AND OTHER RECEIPTS
58. Classification of Government Revenues.
59. Format of estimates of revenue.
60. Basic principles in deciding whether sums shall be applied as AIA.
61. Main forms of receipts in development estimates.
62. Receiver of revenue.
63. Collector of revenue.
64. Responsibility for revenue management.
65. In-year reporting of revenue collection.
66. Fees for services rendered by the national government.
67. Agency services and revenue management.
68. Refund of Revenue.
69. Format of annual and quarterly statements submitted.
PART VII – MANAGEMENT OF GRANTS AND DONATIONS
70. Definition of terms.
71. Grants, donations and sponsorships.
72. Grants administration.
73. Disclosure of authorization and disbursement.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING ON DONATIONS AND GRANTS
74. Monies received by way of grants and donations to be paid into a designated
account.

-- 525 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 527
[Subsidiary]
75. Project selection criteria.
76. Project bank accounts.
77. Records of receipts and disbursements.
78. Responsibilities of NGOs where the project is implemented by NGO.
79. Documents to be attached by NGOs where the project is implemented by NGO.
PART VIII – TREASURY AND CASH MANAGEMENT
CONSOLIDATED FUND
80. Composition of the Consolidated Fund.
81. Process of receipts into Consolidated Fund.
CASH AND BANKING ARRANGEMENTS
82. Criteria for approval of opening and operating national government entities
bank accounts.
83. Guiding principles for cash management.
84. Surrender of End-Year Surplus Cash Balances.
85. Cheques and electronic payments.
86. Cash Management Advisory Committee.
87. Registers and records of government bank accounts.
88. Authority to have access to government bank accounts.
89. Security for cash in transit.
90. Reconciliation of bank accounts.
MANAGING IMPREST TRANSACTIONS
91. Definition of imprest.
92. Determination of imprest levels.
93. Classes of imprest.
94. Duties of Imprest holders.
TREASURY SINGLE ACCOUNT
95. Establishment of a Treasury Single Account.
96. Operation of a Treasury Single Account.
PART IX – ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING
FORM AND BASIC STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS
97. Accounting period.
98. Charging of expenditure to year of accounts.
99. Account codes and standard chart of accounts.
100. Books of accounts to be kept by Accounting Officers.
101. Recording and reporting basis.
102. Financial records and automation of financial operations.
103. Accounting adjustments journal.
104. Vouchers.
105. Powers to delegate voucher approval.
106. Deposit accounts.
107. Clearance and suspense accounts.
108. Payments to beneficiaries residing outside Kenya.
109. Use of electronic systems for financial operations.

-- 526 of 625 --

528 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
110. Restricted access to systems.
111. Procedures for the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
PART X – EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL
112. Consolidated Fund Services.
113. Excess vote.
114. Payments to which an Accounting Officer objects.
115. Goods, works and services to be procured according to an approved
procurement plan.
116. Recovery, disallowance and adjustment of payments.
117. Re-Vote of Budget.
118. Accountable documents.
119. Preservation of accountable documents, books and records.
120. Expenditure in relation to human resources.
121. Payroll certification by accounting officer.
122. Deduction codes to be assigned to all payroll deductions.
123. Remuneration of members of committees and commissions of inquiry.
124. Services rendered by members during private time.
125. Compensation and ex-gratia payment.
BENEFITS AND ALLOWANCES OF PUBLIC OFFICERS
126. Authority for loans and advances.
127. Benefits and allowances for Public Officers.
LEASE FINANCING
128. Lease financing transactions by accounting officers of state and county
departments.
MANAGEMENT OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL TRANSFERS
129. Definitions of terms.
130. Duties of National Government Accounting Officers in managing
intergovernmental transfers to counties.
131. Duties of County government Accounting Officers in managing
intergovernmental transfers.
132. Formats of annual reports on intergovernmental transfers.
133. Transfer made in error or fraudulently.
134. Equitable transfer before approval of County Allocation of Revenue Bill.
135. Liability for costs incurred in violation of principles of cooperate governance
and intergovernmental relations.
PART XI – MONITORING AND REPORTING
136. Responsibility for monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
137. Footnotes to appropriation accounts.
138. Special public funds and state corporations additional reporting
responsibilities.
PART XII – ASSET MANAGEMENT
139. Responsibility of an accounting officer of a national government entity on
assets.
140. Responsibility for national government entity inventory.

-- 527 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 529
[Subsidiary]
141. Accounting officers’ responsibilities upon transfer of assets and liabilities.
142. Assets accruing to the Government by Operation of Law.
143. Register of assets.
144. Purchase and the capacity of official vehicles for certain government officers.
LOSSES AND WRITE OFFS
145. Definition.
146. Accounting officers responsibility for a national government entity.
147. Revelation of offence.
148. Procedure for handling losses.
149. Categories of losses.
150. Investigation of every case of loss.
151. Defective systems.
152. Financial liability of officers.
153. Annual statement of losses.
154. Clarifications on classification of losses.
155. Claims on damaged or incomplete goods.
156. Investigation of losses.
157. Writing off of losses.
158. Interest payable on recoverable losses.
159. Right of the Auditor-General.
PART XIII – INTERNAL AUDIT AND AUDIT COMMITTEES
160. Mandate of internal auditors.
161. Compliance with professional standards and code of ethics.
162. Independence of the internal auditor.
THE INTERNAL AUDITOR-GENERAL
DEPARTMENT OF THE NATIONAL TREASURY
163. Independence of Internal Auditor-General.
164. Functions of Internal Auditor-General Department.
165. The role of Accounting Officer in risk management.
166. Performance appraisal.
167. Reporting material breaches and persistent material breaches.
168. Prohibition from conducting assurance services.
169. Disciplinary liability on internal auditors.
INTERNAL AUDIT PLANNING, PERFORMANCE AND REPORTING
170. Risk based audit assessment strategic plan.
171. Communicating results.
IMPLEMENTATION OF AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS
172. Enforcement of internal audit recommendations.
173. Preparation and submission of quarterly and annual audit reports.
AUDIT COMMITTEES
174. Establishment of audit committees.
175. Duties of the audit committees.
176. Composition of audit committees.

-- 528 of 625 --

530 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
177. Terms of appointment.
178. Vacancy of office.
FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
179. Meetings of the audit committee.
180. Code of conduct.
181. Remuneration and compensation.
182. Capacity building for Audit Committees.
PART XIV – PUBLIC DEBT MANAGEMENT
183. Guiding Principles for national government borrowing.
184. Policy frameworks in public debt management.
185. Medium term debt management strategy.
186. Annual national government borrowing programme.
187. Borrowing powers of the government.
188. Use of moneys borrowed and credits obtained.
189. Formalisation of agreements for loans.
190. Credit purchases.
191. Modes of payment (disbursement) loan funds.
192. Borrowing purposes.
193. Objectives of public debt management.
PUBLIC DEBT MANAGEMENT OFFICE
194. Functions of public debt management office.
195. Redemption, conversion and consolidation of loans.
196. Setting debt limit.
197. Criteria for issuance of government securities.
198. Issuance of government securities outside Kenya.
199. Reporting on public debt by counties and national government entities.
200. Annual debt reporting.
201. Government guaranteed debt.
202. Eligibility and evaluation criteria for national government guarantees.
203. Process for approving a guarantee for a national government entity.
204. Approval of draft loan guarantee by Parliament.
205. Roles and responsibilities of accounting officers in debt management
operations and loan administration.
SINKING FUND
206. Establishment of Sinking Fund.
PART XV – PUBLIC FUNDS
207. Criteria for the establishment of a public Fund.
208. Management and winding up of a national public Fund.
209. Winding up of a national government public Fund.
PART XVI – STATE CORPORATIONS
210. Definitions.
211. Declaration of national government entities and classification of state
corporations.

-- 529 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 531
[Subsidiary]
212. Scope and application.
213. Application for listing by governing bodies of undeclared state corporations.
214. Guiding principles for the establishment of state corporations.
215. Criteria for establishing state corporations.
216. Dissolution of State Corporations.
217. Evaluation of state corporation's performance.
218. Annual budget.
219. Dividends policy and surplus funds.
220. Quarterly reporting by governing bodies.
221. Annual financial statements.
PART XVII – INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL RELATIONS
222. Establishment, purpose and composition of the Intergovernmental Budget and
Economic Council.
223. Recovery Plan and assumption of executive responsibilities of the county.
PART XVIII – MISCELLANEOUS
224. Gazettement of financial accounting and reporting formats.
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM TO THE PUBLIC FINANCE
MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL GOVERNMENT) REGULATIONS, 2015
PARAGRAPH 1.
SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
SUBPARAGRAPH (II)
SUBPARAGRAPH (III)
SUBPARAGRAPH (IV)
SUBPARAGRAPH (V)
PARAGRAPH 2.
SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
SUBPARAGRAPH (II)
SUBPARAGRAPH (III)
PARAGRAPH 3.
PARAGRAPH 4.
PARAGRAPH 5.
PARAGRAPH 6.
PARAGRAPH 7.

-- 530 of 625 --

532 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL GOVERNMENT) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 34/2015, L.N. 229/2015, L.N. 141/2018, L.N. 90/2019, L.N. 155/2019, L.N. 89/2022]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (National
Government) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Act" means the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A)
"Accountant-General" means the officer of the National Treasury designated as the
Accountant-General;
"Accounting Standards Board" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"Accounting Unit" means organizational division in a government entity responsible for
accounting and financial services;
"appointing authority" means—
(a) in case of a national Government entity which is a ministry or department, the
accounting officer designated by the Cabinet Secretary as such; or
(b) in case of national government entity which is a state corporation or any other
national government entity, the body mandated by enabling instrument to manage
that national government entity;
"Appropriation-in-Aid" means any revenue which a national government entity receives
and is approved by Parliament for application by that entity to finance its activities;
"Appropriation Act" has the meaning as assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"budget ceilings" means the maximum amount that the government allocates in a given
year to target sector or expenditure category;
"Budget Circular" means a written instruction issued by the Cabinet Secretary providing
broad guidelines on the budget process of the national government;
"benefit deduction" means a deduction on a payroll system against an official's salary for
a debt arising from employment benefits;
"basic salary" means an officer's salary excluding allowances;
"Cabinet Secretary" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"Cash flow" means a financial statement that shows planned inflow and outflow of
resources over a period covering the financial year in line with the activity level;
"collector of revenue" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"collective agreement deduction" means a deduction on a government payroll system
against an official's salary arising from a collective agreement between the government and a
union and is registered in accordance with applicable law;
"Consolidated Fund Services" means a service the expense of which is charged directly
against and payable from the Consolidated Fund under or by virtue of the Constitution or any
Act of Parliament other than an Appropriations Act;
"Contingencies Fund" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;

-- 531 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 533
[Subsidiary]
"Corporate governance" means the process and structure used to direct and manage
business affairs of the national government entities towards enhancing prosperity and good
governance with the ultimate objective of realizing national long- term value while taking
into account the interest of all stakeholders;
"County Allocation of Revenue Bill" means the Bill annually introduced into Parliament
and enacted under Article 218(b) of the Constitution;
"County Emergencies Fund" has the same meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the
Act;
"County Government entity" has the same meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the
Act;
"County Public Debt" has the same meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"debt" means an amount of money owed and already payable by an official to any person
and for the purposes of these Regulations, includes insurance premiums deducted in terms of
policies with long and short-term insurers;
"deduction code" means a code issued by the Accountant-General to enable a person to
deduct money from an individual paid via the government payroll system;
"discretionary deduction" means a deduction on the government payroll system against
an official's salary, other than benefit, collective agreement, state or statutory deductions;
"disposal" in relation to a capital asset, includes—
(a) the demolition, dismantling or destruction of the capital asset; or
(b) any other process applied to a capital asset which results in loss of ownership of
the capital asset otherwise than by way of transfer of ownership;
"Division of Revenue Bill" means the Bill annually introduced into Parliament and enacted
under Article 218(a) of the Constitution;
"donation" has the meaning assigned to it under section 47 of the Act;
"economy" means minimizing the cost of resources used or required to achieve priority
objectives;
"effectiveness" means the extent to which a programme intervention has attained, or is
expected to attain, its objectives efficiently in a sustainable manner;
"efficiency" means a measure of how economically resources or inputs (including fund,
expertise and time) are converted to results;
"estimates of expenditure" means—
(a) annual estimates of expenditure based on programmes and sub-programmes
prepared on a three-fiscal year rolling basis, specifying the resources to be
allocated and the outcomes to be achieved and outputs to be delivered, the
estimates for the first year of every such period of three fiscal years requiring
appropriation by the National Assembly; or
(b) supplementary estimates of expenditure appropriated by the National Assembly;
"fair market value" in relation to a capital asset, means the value at which a knowledgeable
willing buyer would buy and a knowledgeable willing seller would sell the capital asset in an
arm's length transaction;
"financial statements" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the 30th June in each year;

-- 532 of 625 --

534 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
"governing body" means a body of person managing a public entity and includes a
commission, a board of trustees, a board of directors and a management board;
"grant" has the meaning assigned to it under sections 47 of the Act;
"grant recipient" has the meaning assigned to it under sections 47 of the Act;
"intended beneficiaries" has the meaning assigned to it under section 47 of the Act;
"internal control" means a set of systems to ensure that financial and other records
are accurate, reliable, complete and ensure adherence to the management policies of the
Ministry, department or other agency of Government, for the orderly and efficient conduct of
the Ministry, department or agency, and the proper recording and safeguarding of its assets
and resources;
"irregular expenditure" means expenditure, other than unauthorized expenditure defined
under this section, incurred in contravention of or that is not in accordance with a requirement
of any relevant legislation, including—
(a) the Act;
(b) these Regulations;
(c) the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act (Cap. 412C) or any Regulations
made in accordance with that Act; or
(d) any county legislation providing for procurement procedures in that county
government; or
(e) any other Act of Parliament;
"medium term" has the same meaning as assigned to it in the Act;
"national government entity" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"Principal Secretary" has the meaning assigned to under section 2 of the Act;
"State corporation" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"public debt" has the meaning assigned to it under Article 214(2) of the Constitution;
"public money" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"public officer" has the meaning assigned to it in under Article 260 of the Constitution;
"programme" means a group of independent, but closely-related, activities designed to
achieve a common outcome;
"receiver of revenue" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"regulatory agency" means a national government entity established by an Act of
Parliament to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Act that established it;
"revenue" has the meaning assigned to it under the Commission on Revenue Allocation
Act (Cap. 428);
"revised estimates" refers to the supplementary budget estimates and approved budget
reallocations prepared and submitted under section 43 of the Act;
"spending unit" refers to a government component for which appropriation is allocated
within the budget and which is authorized to spend;
"sinking fund" means an account or pot of money or securities set aside to pay for a bond,
repurchase or early redemption of Treasury Bonds;

-- 533 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 535
[Subsidiary]
"statutory appropriation" means the authority to spend money allocated to the executive
in accordance with the purposes specified in the Constitution or an Act of Parliament;
"statutory deduction" means a deduction on government payroll system against a public
officer's salary, which is required or permitted by a law, court order or arbitration award;
"subscription statement" is a statement showing the investor's holdings as registered on
the Central Depository Securities (CDS) Register at the Central Bank of Kenya;
"supplementary budget estimates" means additional request of funds by the national
government to Parliament;
"third party" has the meaning assigned to it under section 47 of the Act;
"unutilized balances" means any amounts withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund and
appropriation in aid collections for purposes of provision of basic services under an
Appropriations Act and not expended at the end of the financial year;
"unathourised expenditure" means—
(a) overspending of a vote or programme within a vote; or
(b) expenditure not in accordance with the purpose of a vote or, in the case of a
programme, not in accordance with the purpose of the programme;
"value for money" means the economic, efficient and effective utilization of resources;
"vote" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"vote-on-account" means a special provision by which the national government obtains
the authority of the National Assembly for a sum sufficient to incur expenditure on various
items for a part of the year, pending the consideration and approval of budget estimates for
that year; and
"wasteful expenditure" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act.
[L.N. 229/2015, r. 3.]
Application of the Regulations.
3. These Regulations shall apply to—
(a) State departments;
(b) National government entities under Regulation 211 (2), (4) and (5) of these
Regulations;
(c) Public Funds under regulation 211(6) of these Regulations;
(d) any other person performing any act or doing such thing that is provided for under
this Act.
Object and Purpose of the Regulations.
4. The object and purpose of these Regulations shall be—
(a) to provide means of administering the powers vested in the Cabinet Secretary
for the National Treasury under the Constitution, the Act and any other related
legislation;
(b) to harmonize and standardize their application throughout government service in
controlling and managing the finances;
(c) to set out a standardized financial management system for use in Government
service which is capable of producing accurate and reliable accounts free from

-- 534 of 625 --

536 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
errors, fraud and which will be useful in management decisions and statutory
reporting;
(d) to provide for the conduct of fiscal relations between the national and county
governments;
(e) to ensure accountability, transparency and the effective, economic and efficient
collection and utilization of public resources.
Officers to be conversant with Regulations.
5. All Accounting Officers shall ensure that all public officers under their control have
access to copies of these Regulations and the public officers shall ensure they are fully
conversant with the contents of these Regulations.
Openness and accountability.
6. (1) Subject to national security considerations, the public shall be provided with full
access to financial information in a timely manner for purposes of seeking public input by—
(a) establishing a focal point to facilitate access to financial information; or
(b) making information available in the media or;
(c) presenting information in national languages, summarised and user-friendly
forms; or
(d) making financial information available on websites that allow for information to
be downloaded.
(2) The National Treasury shall arrange for effective public participation during the
development of their annual budget estimates including the publication of citizens' budgets
which shall explain and summarize the budget proposals.
(3) The dates for the sectoral forums and the venues shall be publicly announced one week
in advance, and an annual calendar of events released at the start of the financial year.
Cabinet Secretary to publish process and procedures for public participation.
7. (1) For purposes of public participation in planning and budgeting process there shall
be participatory structures and processes that shall encompass a broad range of strategies,
including—
(a) open forums, written submissions, online platform and media;
(b) specification of venues of public participation; and
(c) indicative dates of public participation.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall notify the general public through a notice in the gazette
or at least two newspapers of wide circulation on the venue or manner of submitting written
submissions.
(3) The documents submitted to Parliament and any other published documents shall be
published and publicised within 7 days of presentation.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall give a responsibility statement confirming the extent to
which general public was consulted particularly on the Budget Policy Statement and Sector
Working Groups.
Monetary unit, accounting and reporting currency.
8. (1) The Kenyan shilling shall be the unit of account for drawing up and implementing
the county budgets, presenting and reporting accounts.

-- 535 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 537
[Subsidiary]
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) of this regulation, certain operations may be
carried out in international currencies subject to conditions laid down in these Regulations
or other financial instruments.
Financial management forms and manuals.
9. (1) National Treasury shall Publish financial manuals and forms which may be used by
national government entities to support implementation of these Regulations.
(2) The financial manuals and forms issued in accordance with these Regulations shall
facilitate adoption of international standards and emerging best practices.
(3) The publications under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be made with the approval
of the Cabinet Secretary.
(4) The financial manuals shall contain relevant procedures for the budget preparation,
budget execution, keeping of books of accounts, formats of financial statements and
Government standard chart of accounts issued by the National Treasury.
Accounting responsibility not diminished by audit.
10. The responsibilities of internal and external auditors exercised in accordance with
the Constitution, the Act and other legislation shall not diminish the Accounting Officers’
responsibility to maintain financial discipline as required by the Act and these Regulations.
Responsibility for hand-over by financial officers.
11. The accountability of a public officer vacating an office shall not be completed until
the financial and accounting records kept by him or her have been properly handed over in
writing to an officer taking over his or her duties and attested by their supervisor, but this
does not preclude the public officer from handing over any other documents required under
any other law or government policy.
Application of secure signatures.
12. (1) Any public officer signing any document or record pertaining to a financial
transaction shall ensure that the signature is given in such a manner so as to preclude
subsequent alteration or addition to the information contained in such document or record.
(2) The signature of any public officer shall not be binding on an Accounting Officer or
a public officer performing a financial function unless a specimen of the signature is duly
communicated in advance to the relevant public officer or any other person performing a
financial function.
(3) If a public officer no longer occupies a public office, the Accounting Officer shall nullify
that officer's specimen signature and communicate the same to all relevant public officers or
any other person performing a financial function, within a reasonable time.
Signing blank or blind accountability documents.
13. (1) A public officer shall not sign a blank or incomplete cheque, record or other
document, pertaining to a financial transaction.
(2) It shall be the duty of any public officer signing any document or record pertaining
to a financial transaction to read and satisfy himself or herself that it is proper to give his or
her signature and his or her signature shall be evidence of acceptance of responsibility for the
document, whether the public officer read it or not.
(3) The signing of a document contrary to paragraph (1) and (2) shall constitute an offence
under the Act.

-- 536 of 625 --

538 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Restricted use of green ink.
14. A public officer, except the President or the Auditor-General, shall not use green ink
or green pencil in recording or transacting any official financial transaction.
Restricted use of brown ink.
15. A public officer other than the Cabinet Secretary, the Principal Secretary, the Internal
Auditor-General or Head of Internal Audit, shall not use brown ink or brown pencil in
recording or transacting any official financial transaction.
Use of indelible ink.
16. (1) Financial records and documents shall be written in indelible ink.
(2) An entry in a financial record or document shall not be obliterated, erased or altered
by being written over.
(3) Payment in connection with any document bearing an alteration, obliteration
or erasure shall be refused by the relevant public officer or any other person unless
countersigned, but this shall not apply to a cheque or official receipt.
(4) A person who contravenes the provisions of this regulation commits an offence under
the Act.
PART II – CORPORATE MANAGEMENT
Corporate governance.
17. (1) Every national government entity to which the Act and these Regulations apply
shall include in their annual financial report as provided in section 81 of the Act, a statement
by each entity's Accounting Officer on compliance of the entity with these Regulations under
this part.
(2) Where the entity is not fully compliant with these Regulations, the Accounting Officer
of that entity shall identify the reasons for non-compliance and indicate the steps being taken
to become compliant.
(3) The statements made in the report under this regulation shall be submitted to the
Cabinet Secretary.
Establishment of Public Finance Management Standing Committees.
18. (1) There is established in every national government entity a committee to be
known as the Public Finance Management Standing Committee (hereinafter referred to as
the "Standing Committee) to provide strategic guidance to the entity on public finance
management matters.
(2) Each standing committee shall comprise of the following—
(a) the Accounting Officer as chairperson of the Standing Committee;
(b) an officer designated by the Accounting Officer as secretary of the Standing
Committee and who shall be either the head of the finance or accounts units or
head of both finance and accounts units of the entity; and
(c) heads of departments or administrative units dealing with public finance
management matters.
(3) The Standing Committee shall meet as often as is necessary but at least once
every quarter so as to coordinate management of public finance for entities and shall be
accountable to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for the entity or in case of Parliament,
Judiciary, Independent Offices and Commissions, to the head of that entity.

-- 537 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 539
[Subsidiary]
(4) The Standing Committee may establish sub-committees for the better carrying out of
its roles and responsibilities under this regulation.
Roles and responsibilities of the standing committee.
19. (1) The Standing Committee shall generally be responsible for the following—
(a) ensuring that there is prioritization on resources allocated to a national
government entity for the smooth implementation of the entities mission, strategy,
goals, risk policy plans and objectives;
(b) regularly reviewing, monitoring budget implementation and advice on the entities
accounts, major capital expenditures and reviewing performance and strategies at
least on a quarterly basis;
(c) identifying risks and implementation of appropriate measures to manage such
risks or anticipated changes impacting on the entity;
(d) reviewing on a regular basis the adequacy and integrity of the entity's internal
control, acquisition and divestitures and management information systems
including compliance with applicable laws, regulations, rules and guidelines;
(e) establishing and implementing a system that provides necessary information to
the stakeholders including stakeholder communication policy for the entity in line
with Article 35 of the Constitution;
(f) monitoring the effectiveness of the corporate governance practices under which
the entity operates and propose revisions as may be required, from time to time;
(g) monitoring timely resolution of audit issues; and
(h) any other matter referred to it from time to time by the responsible Cabinet
Secretary or in the case of Parliament, Judiciary, independent office and
commissions, the head of that entity.
(2) The Standing Committee shall submit a quarterly report of its work including any
recommendations to the responsible Cabinet Secretary or in case of Parliament, Judiciary,
Independent Offices and Commissions, to the head of that entity.
Duties and responsibilities of the office of the Accountant-General.
20. The Accountant-General Department shall be responsible for—
(a) advising the national government on accounting and reporting matters;
(b) overseeing the implementation of the approved government accounting standards;
(c) designing and development of governments' accounting systems both manual and
computerized;
(d) providing advice to national government on the best and appropriate financial
reporting formats;
(e) providing link between local and international accounting standards bodies on
matters relating to public sector financial reporting;
(f) developing guidelines for accounting staffing levels and training to ensure
technical competence and knowledge of financial accounting and reporting,
advising on accounting and financial matters;
(g) overseeing the implementation of the approved government accounting standards,
policies, bases and concepts;
(h) advising governments on cash and treasury management;

-- 538 of 625 --

540 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(i) administering the Consolidated, Equalization and Contingencies Funds;
(j) advising the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament on accounting matters;
(k) administering the Scheme of Service for Accountants; and
(l) policy development and research.
Presidential warrants.
21. (1) Once the Annual Appropriation Bill or Supplementary Bill has been assented
to, the Cabinet Secretary shall obtain presidential warrants authorizing issues from the
Consolidated Fund in accordance with the respective Appropriation Acts.
(2) The Presidential Warrants in paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be transmitted to
the Controller of Budget by the Cabinet Secretary to authorize withdrawals in accordance with
Article 228 of the Constitution.
National Treasury warrant.
22. On receipt of the Presidential warrant, the Cabinet Secretary shall issue a National
Treasury warrant granting authority to Accounting Officers to incur expenditure for the year
in respect of their votes.
Responsibilities of Accounting Officers.
23. (1) Accounting Officers shall in accordance with Article 226(2) of the Constitution and
section 68(1) of the Act, be accountable to the National Assembly—
(a) for management of their departments public finances, including whether sufficient
resources have been allocated to a particular program;
(b) for ensuring the most effective means of achieving desired program outcomes are
used;
(c) for maintaining effective systems of internal control and the measures taken to
ensure that they are effective; and
(d) for measures taken to prepare the financial reports that reflect a true and fair
financial position of the entity;
(e) for implementation of the recommendations of Parliament arising from the reports
by the Auditor-General and the Controller of Budget.
(2) In addition to the responsibilities of Accounting Officers provided for in the Act, an
Accounting Officer designated under the Constitution, the Act or any other Act, shall—
(a) comply with any tax, levy, duty, pension, commitments and audit commitments as
may be provided for by legislation;
(b) where he or she reasonably believes that an unauthorized, or irregular expenditure
has occurred, immediately report, in writing, particulars of the expenditure to the
relevant authority with a copy to the National Treasury; or
(c) before transferring any funds to an entity within or outside government, ensure
that there is a written assurance from the entity that it shall implement effective,
efficient and transparent financial management and internal control systems, or,
if such written assurance is not or cannot be given, render the transfer of the funds
subject to conditions and remedial measures requiring the entity to establish and
implement effective, efficient and transparent financial management and internal
control systems;

-- 539 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 541
[Subsidiary]
(d) enforce compliance with any prescribed conditions if the respective government
entity gives financial assistance to any other entity or person in accordance with
the law;
(e) take into account all relevant financial considerations, including issues of
propriety, regularity and value for money, where policy proposals affecting the
Accounting Officer's responsibilities are considered, and where necessary, bring
those considerations to the attention of the relevant authority;
(f) promptly consult and seek the prior views of the National Treasury on economic
viability and financial implications on any new entity which a state department,
or state organ intends to establish or in the establishment of which it took the
initiative;
(g) not commit national government entities to any liability for which money
has not been appropriated provided that expenditure for projects or programs
implemented beyond one financial year is provided for in the subsequent financial
years; and
(h) comply, and ensure compliance by national government entities with the
provisions of the Act and these Regulations.
[L.N. 229/2015, r. 4.]
Delegation by the Accounting Officer.
24. (1) The Accounting Officer of a national government entity may delegate to a public
officer, in writing, any of the Accounting Officer's powers or functions under the Act or these
Regulations.
(2) In exercising powers and functions under a delegation, the public officer shall comply
with any lawful directions of the Accounting Officer.
(3) The delegation in this regulation may include the authority to incur expenditure in
accordance with any limits prescribed by the Accounting Officer.
(4) Delegation of power does not take away the responsibility of the accountability from
the Accounting Officer.
Designation of public officers as AIE Holder.
25. (1) An accounting officer may authorize a public officer under their national
government entity to be an Authority to Incur Expenditure (AIE) Holder.
(2) An Accounting Officer who finds it necessary to authorize a public officer in another
Ministry or county government to incur official expenditure on his or her behalf, shall do so by
issuing an Authority to Incur Expenditure addressed to the Accounting Officer of the national
government or county government entity.
(3) The designation of AIE Holder shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the National
Treasury
(4) An Accounting Officer shall maintain a register of all AIE Holders designated under
the Act.
(5) Where an Accounting Officer delegates this authority, the accounting officer shall
remain responsible for any expenditure incurred as a result of that delegation.

-- 540 of 625 --

542 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
PART III – FISCAL STRATEGY AND MACRO-ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK
Fiscal responsibility principles.
26. (1) In addition to the fiscal responsibility principles set out in section 15 of the Act, the
following fiscal responsibility principles shall apply in the management of public finances—
(a) national government's expenditure on the compensation of employees (including
benefits and allowances) shall not exceed 35 percent of the national government's
equitable share of the revenue raised nationally plus other revenues generated by
the national government pursuant to Article 209 (4) of the Constitution;
(b) for the avoidance of doubt, the revenue referred to in paragraph (a) shall not include
revenues that accrue from extractive natural resources, including oil and coal;
(c) pursuant to the provision of section 50(2) of the Act, the public debt shall not
exceed ten trillion shillings;
(d) the annual fiscal primary balance shall be consistent with the debt target in
paragraph (b);
(e) for avoidance of doubt, the requirement under section 15(2)(a) of the Act shall
exclude the loan redemption receipts for on-lent loans but shall include loan
interest receipts and penalties on loans; and
(f) pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act, the national government expenditure on
development shall be at least thirty percent in line with the requirement under
Section 15(2)(a) of the Act;
(g) if the national government does not achieve the requirement of regulation 15(l)
(f) above at the end of that financial year, the Cabinet Secretary shall submit a
responsibility statement to Parliament explaining the reasons for the deviation and
provide a plan on how to comply with the provisions of section 15(2)(a) of the Act
in the subsequent years.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall, in line with prudent management of risks envisioned in
section 15(2)(e) of the Act, in the budget policy statement, include a statement of fiscal risks
outlining the potential policy decisions and key areas of uncertainty that may have a material
effect on the fiscal outlook and the statement and shall further include—
(a) fiscal risks arising from macroeconomic shocks, including matters touching on
real GDP growth, inflation, commodity prices, and interest and exchange rates and
adverse impacts from regional and international economy;
(b) potential policy decisions affecting revenue, tax payer behavioural responses and
court decisions that are likely to affect revenue bases and overall tax collections
and revenue and government income, which may include tax concessions (or tax
expenditures), increase in tax rates, tax minimisation and avoidance by tax payers
and rates;
(c) potential policy decisions that could increase or decrease expenses depending on
decisions taken, and which constitute risks to the fiscal forecasts only to the extent
that they cannot be managed within existing baselines or budget allowances;
(d) potential capital decisions that are risk to the fiscal forecasts only to the extent
that they cannot be managed within existing national government balance sheet;
(e) matters dependent on external factors such as the outcome of negotiations or
international obligations; and
(f) a list of contingent liability, including debt guarantees, pension liability and
pending bills.

-- 541 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 543
[Subsidiary]
(3) Despite the provisions of paragraph (2) of this regulation, the Cabinet Secretary may
exempt from disclosure items of risk if in his or her opinion the disclosure—
(a) may prejudice substantial economic interests of Kenya, security or defines of
Kenya, International relations of the government and on-going litigation and
negotiation; or
(b) may compromise the government in a material way in negotiation, litigation or
commercial activity; or
(c) may result in a material loss of value to the government.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary may disclose the specific fiscal risks if—
(a) their impact in his or her view is significant enough;
(b) a decision has not yet been taken but it is reasonably possible (but not probable)
that the matter shall be approved or the situation is likely to occur;
(c) it is reasonably probable that the matter will be approved or the situation will occur,
but the matter cannot be quantified or assigned to particular years with reasonable
certainty;
(d) any other matters the National Treasury considers, using their best professional
judgement that the matters may have a material effect on the fiscal and economic
outlook but are not certain enough to include in the fiscal forecasts.
[L.N. 155/2015, r. 2, L.N. 89/2022, r. 2.]
Budget Policy Statement.
27. (1) For the avoidance of doubt, the Budget Policy Statement submitted under section
25(2) of the Act, shall contain an assessment of the current state of domestic economy by—
(a) providing an assessment of the impacts of regional and international economy on
the medium macroeconomic framework and its outlook;
(b) indicating allocation of available resources between the national and county levels
of government and among county governments;
(c) providing a macroeconomic framework underlying the budgetary and fiscal policy
over the medium term;
(d) providing a medium-term fiscal framework defining a top-down aggregate resource
envelope;
(e) providing a statement of fiscal responsibility principles, as specified in the Act
and these Regulations and indicating whether the fiscal strategy adheres to these
principles; and
(f) providing a summary of programmes that are of national interest for the
forthcoming year.
(2) In addition to the provisions under section 25(4) of the Act, the Budget Policy
Statement shall contain a fiscal risk statement, including, any commitments and contingent
liabilities not included in the fiscal forecasts, and all other circumstances which may have
a material effect on the fiscal and economic forecasts and which have not already been
incorporated into the fiscal forecasts as well as information on the losses and outstanding
payments of the State Corporations.
(3) Before tabling a report containing recommendations on the Budget Policy Statement
for adoption by Parliament in accordance with section 25(7) of the Act, the relevant committee
of Parliament shall seek the views of the Cabinet Secretary on its recommendations.

-- 542 of 625 --

544 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(4) Once the Budget Policy Statement is adopted by Parliament, it shall serve as the basis
of expenditure ceilings specified in the fiscal framework.
(5) The ceiling for the development expenditure and personnel spending of the national
government budget shall be approved by Parliament and be binding for the next two budget
years.
(6) The National Treasury shall include a statement explaining any deviation to the
provisions of paragraph (4).
Macroeconomic framework.
28. The macroeconomic framework shall contain information on the macroeconomic
situation and forecasts for—
(a) the current budget year and three further years and actual out-turns for the
previous budget years including—
(i) gross domestic product and its components;
(ii) consumer prices and gross domestic product deflator;
(iii) current account position of the balance of payments;
(iv) savings and investment balance;
(v) assumptions underpinning the forecasts; and
(b) the medium term macroeconomic forecasts affecting fiscal policy.
Contents of a fiscal framework.
29. (1) The fiscal framework in the Budget Policy Statement shall contain—
(a) updated forecasts expressed in Kenya shillings and as a percentage of gross
domestic product for the current budget year and three further years and actual
results for the previous budget years for the consolidated general government
budgets for—
(i) level of budgetary revenues by classification of the main categories of
revenues;
(ii) level of budgetary expenditures by economic and functional classifications;
(iii) capital expenditures;
(iv) the overall balance and primary balance position;
(v) level of public debt and publically guaranteed debt;
(vi) key assumptions on which the above numbers are based;
(vii) sensitivity analysis taking account of possible changes in macroeconomic
and other conditions; and
(viii) any other information the Cabinet Secretary determines is material to fiscal
strategy.
(b) an explanation of the fiscal policies in relation to fiscal responsibility principles,
and any temporary measures to be implemented to ensure compliance, if
necessary;
(c) an analysis and explanation of—
(i) revenue policy, including planned changes to taxes and policies affecting
other revenues;
(ii) deficit and debt policy, including an analysis of debt sustainability; and
(iii) expenditure policy, including expenditure priorities, aggregate expenditure
intentions, including for the consolidated budget, county consolidated

-- 543 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 545
[Subsidiary]
budgets; and expenditure ceilings and other targets or limits implied by or
required by the fiscal responsibility principles;
(d) an analysis of the consistency of the updated fiscal strategies with the previous
fiscal strategies, providing an explanation of any significant changes.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall gazette effective dates and give general guidelines and
formats for preparing a consolidated general government accounts for statistical purposes.
Revisions to the fiscal framework.
30. The fiscal framework in regulation 29, may be revised as a result of—
(a) a significant and unexpected change in macroeconomic indicators and
assumptions; or
(b) policy changes arising from change of government.
PART IV – BUDGET PREPARATION
Responsibility for preparing annual estimates of expenditure.
31. (1) The Accounting Officer shall ensure that the draft estimates relating to her or his
department are prepared in conformity with the Constitution, the Act and these Regulations.
(2) The Accounting Officer is responsible, in particular for ensuring that—
(a) all services which can be reasonably foreseen are included in the estimates and
that they are within the capacity of her or his national government entity during
the financial year;
(b) the estimates have been prepared are complete and accurate as possible;
(c) the estimates have been framed with regard to economy and efficiency;
(d) the requisite authority has been obtained, where necessary, before provision is
made in the estimates; and
(e) the estimates are submitted to the National Treasury in the manner and format to
be issued by the Cabinet Secretary.
Budget preparation process.
32. (1) The budget preparation process for the following financial year (N+1) shall
start not later than the 30th August of the current financial year (N) with the issuance of
the annual budget circular by the Cabinet Secretary and in compliance with formats and
recommendations contained in these circulars or guidelines, instructions and the financial
manual.
(2) The budget sector working groups shall, on the basis of budget sector ceilings
contained in the Budget Review and Outlook Paper (BROP), submit by January of each year
(N) the sector reports to the National Treasury which shall include printed estimates for the
current year (N) and for the forthcoming financial year (N+1) and two outer years on a rolling
basis (N+2), (N+3).
(3) The estimates for the sector referred to in paragraph (1) shall be consistent with
regulation 29.
(4) Budget proposals shall be submitted in the prescribed formats that support program-
based budgeting and classification of expenditure in economic classes.
(5) All budget proposals shall be supported by the national government entity' strategic
plan.

-- 544 of 625 --

546 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(6) The preparation and submission of estimates shall be done exclusively through
prescribed automated integrated financial management systems.
(7) On receipt of sector reports from sector chairs, the Cabinet Secretary shall convene
public sector forums to receive inputs from the public.
(8) The proposed sector ceilings for the next three financial years contained in the Budget
Review and Outlook Paper (BROP) may be firmed up or readjusted in the Budget Policy
Statement submitted in February of financial year (N) and adopted by Parliament by February
28 of same financial year (N).
(9) The approved Budget Policy statement shall be published on the National Treasury
website.
(10) Following the approval of the Budget Policy Statement, the national government
entities, or agencies shall finalize their estimates for years (N+I), (N+2) and (N+3) by March
31 of Financial year (N) and submit to the Cabinet Secretary.
(11) Budget estimates shall be reviewed and consolidated and the draft budget estimates
submitted to Cabinet by April 15th of the financial year (N).
(12) Budget estimates of the national government entities, or agencies shall be reviewed
and consolidated and the annual budget estimates submitted to Parliament, by April 30 of
financial year (N).
Budget guidelines.
33. Unless provided otherwise in the Act, these Regulations or any other guidelines
developed in furtherance of the Act or these Regulations, the following guidelines shall be
observed at all times during budget formulation and approval—
(a) all revenue and expenditure shall be entered into the national government budget
estimates;
(b) expenditure entered in national government budget estimates shall be authorised
for one financial year only;
(c) budget shall be balanced;
(d) the Kenyan shillings shall be the unit of account for drawing up and
implementation of the national government budgets, as well as the presentation
of those accounts;
(e) total budget revenue shall cover total budget expenditure and therefore—
(i) except as provided by legislation, there shall be no use of specific revenue
to finance specific expenditure; and
(ii) appropriation shall be for a specific purpose or a specific programme or item
of expenditure; and
(f) budget estimates shall take into account expenditure priorities which contributes
to the realization of the required output and desired policy outcome.
Determination of budget ceilings.
34. The budget ceiling contained in the Budget Policy Statement shall take into account—
(a) the aggregate resource envelope following the forecast of major revenue and
expenditure categories (the latter according to both economic and administrative
classification);
(b) the non-discretionary expenditure (debt service, wages and other related items);
(c) the overall expenditure taking into consideration the fiscal rules;

-- 545 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 547
[Subsidiary]
(d) breakdown of the overall expenditure into recurrent and development expenditure
by sector ceilings; and
(e) expenditure priorities as set out in national government policies.
Budget estimates audit.
35. (1) Each Accounting Officer may cause any proposed budget estimates to be examined
and reported on by the internal audit unit of that national government entity.
(2) The Accounting Officer referred to in paragraph (1) shall take into account any
recommendations made in respect thereto before submitting estimates to the National
Treasury.
(3) A person who fails under this regulation to provide information, or submits
information which that person knows to be misleading or incorrect shall have committed an
offence under the Act.
Budget review process.
36. (1) On receipt of estimates from Accounting Officers the Cabinet Secretary shall cause
to be conducted Budget discussions to review estimates of the entities concerned in order to
ensure that these plans and estimates are in accordance with the macro-economic policy and
fiscal framework.
(2) Where the budget hearings in paragraph (1) necessitates changes, the Cabinet
Secretary, may require an Accounting Officer to make adjustments to the estimates.
Provisions in Appropriation Bills.
37. Appropriation Bills shall provide for—
(a) the Votes and programs of the financial year;
(b) financial provision in respect of certain activities of the national governments
during that financial year; and
(c) enabling the withdrawal out of the Consolidated Fund, or any other national public
fund.
Vote on account.
38. (1) Where the Appropriations Act is not assented to or is not likely to be assented
before the first working day of the financial year, the Speaker to the National Assembly, with
approval of National Assembly, shall communicate to the Cabinet Secretary grant of authority
to withdraw from the Consolidated Fund of monies of an amount not exceeding one-half of
the amount included in the estimates in accordance with section 39(7) of the Act.
(2) Accounting officers shall make necessary entries in their books in respect of the
amount of the vote on account approved.
(3) Moneys withdrawn under paragraph (1) shall be for the purpose of meeting
expenditure on the government's programmes and activities in respect of the financial year —
(a) up to fifty (50%) percent of the estimated of budget for the financial year submitted
to the National Assembly; or
(b) until such a time the Appropriation Act is assented to.
(4) Funds withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund under this regulation may be utilized
only for services for which funds have been provided for in the budget estimates submitted
to National Assembly.

-- 546 of 625 --

548 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(5) The funds provided for in paragraph (2) shall be regarded as forming part of the funds
appropriated in the relevant annual budget estimates for that financial year.
39. Deleted by L.N. 229/2015, r. 5.
Supplementary budgets estimates.
40. (1) Each Accounting Officer shall, within the guidelines of the supplementary budget
circular and in conformity with budget guidelines issued by the Cabinet Secretary, prepare
revised budget estimates in the format to be issued by the Cabinet Secretary.
(2) Prior to incurring any expenditure under paragraph (1), Accounting Officers shall seek
the approval of the National Treasury, and if approval is granted by the Cabinet Secretary,
it shall be communicated to the Accounting Officers through a notification which shall be
copied to the Auditor-General and the Controller of Budget.
(3) The purpose for which approval is sought for a supplementary budget shall be—
(a) unforeseen and unavoidable, in circumstances where no budget provision was
made; or
(b) unavoidable, in circumstances where there is an existing budgetary provision
which, however, is inadequate.
(4) For purposes of paragraph (3), the following shall not be considered unforeseen and
unavoidable expenditure—
(a) expenditure that, although known when finalizing the estimates of the original
budget, could not be accommodated within allocations; and
(b) tariff adjustments and price increases.
(5) Accounting Officers may seek supplementary budget if the expenditure cannot be met
by budget reallocation under section 43 of the Act.
(6) The request for supplementary budget in paragraph (5) shall be presented in a format
that facilitates comparison with the original budget and shall contain all the information
necessary to enable a decision on the application to be reached and shall include—
(a) the Vote, program, sub-programme and broad expenditure category which it is
desired to supplement, the original sum voted thereon and any supplements which
may have since been added;
(b) the actual expenditure and the outstanding liabilities or commitments against the
item on the date when the request is made;
(c) the amount of the supplement required, the reasons why the supplement is
necessary and why it has not been possible to keep within the voted provision;
(d) the basis for the calculation underpinning the supplementary;
(e) the proposed source of financing of the additional expenditure;
(f) an analysis of the fiscal impact of the additional expenditure, or of the implications,
if any, for the planned outputs and outcomes of the affected programmes;
(g) any implied deviation from the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and
the financial objectives; and
(h) the latest fiscal projections.
(7) The national government entity requesting additional funds through a supplementary
budget process shall submit a memorandum to the National Treasury on a date determined
by National Treasury.

-- 547 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 549
[Subsidiary]
(8) For avoidance of doubt, budget allocations for new policy options and service delivery
initiatives shall only be considered when introduced in the annual estimates of budget in
accordance with the procedure laid down in the Act and these Regulations.
(9) In approving any estimates under sections 43 and 44 of the Act, the National Assembly
approval shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total approved budget unless it is for
unforeseen and unavoidable need as defined in section 21 of the Act.
[L.N. 229/2015, r. 6.]
Budget classification and the standard chart of accounts.
41. (1) The national government budget estimates and each county government's budget
estimates shall be prepared, accounted for and reported in accordance with the Government
of Kenya budget classification and chart of accounts issued by the National Treasury.
(2) As much as practicable, these classifications shall be designed to support financial and
economic reporting requirements in the Act and generally accepted international standards.
PART V – BUDGET EXECUTION
General rules relating to budget Execution.
42. Overall control of national government budget execution shall be exercised through
strict application of the following general rules, which shall apply to all transactions with the
specific exception of debt service payments—
(a) debt service payments shall be a first charge on the Consolidated Fund and
the Accounting Officer shall ensure this is done to the extent possible that the
government does not default on debt obligations;
(b) debt payments shall be made whether or not they meet the general rules provided
that the Cabinet Secretary reporting of any excess over appropriations, with full
explanations of the circumstances, to Parliament in the next quarterly reporting
cycle; and
(c) other than temporary treasury liquidity management operations, no payment shall
be made from the Consolidated Fund as a direct charge, except under an item
identified in the annual budget estimates.
Accounting Officers to exercise budgetary control measures.
43. An Accounting Officer shall—
(a) sign financial statements thereby making himself or herself responsible for their
correctness;
(b) ensure that public funds entrusted to their care are properly safeguarded and are
applied for purposes for only which they were intended and appropriated by the
National Assembly;
(c) ensure all appropriation-in-aid due to national government entity are collected
and properly accounted for in accordance with the relevant laws, rules and
regulations;
(d) manage control and ensure that policies are carried out efficiently and wastage of
public funds is eliminated; and
(e) ensure each national government entity has an audit committee in place.

-- 548 of 625 --

550 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Accounting Officers to request cash on the basis of an approved quarterly cash disbursement
schedule.
44. (1) Accounting Officers shall provide the National Treasury with an annual cash flow
plan as a requisition for funds needed for that financial year.
(2) National government entities shall execute their approved budgets based on the
annual appropriation legislation, and the approved annual cash flow plan with the exception
of unforeseen and unavoidable spending dealt with through the Contingencies Fund, or
supplementary estimates.
(3) The annual cash flow plans prepared by Accounting Officers shall be broken down into
a three months rolling basis and shall be adjusted to reflect any implementation realities in
consultation with the National Treasury.
(4) As far as possible, quarterly cash flow projections prepared by the Accounting
Officers shall be supported by a procurement plan approved in accordance with the Public
Procurement and Asset Disposal Act (Cap. 412C).
Consolidation and approval of cash limit to be communicated to accounting officers.
45. (1) The National Treasury shall consolidate all expenditure requirements and
projections as forwarded by Accounting Officers, compare with the projected revenues
including net domestic borrowing, and thereafter in consultation with Accounting Officers,
agree on an indicative annual cash flow forecast limit for that financial year.
(2) The National Treasury shall issue a National Treasury circular communicating the cash
flow projections agreed with the Accounting Officers.
(3) In the event of unanticipated cash flow fluctuations, the National Treasury shall inform
the Accounting Officers through a circular requesting them to review and submit revised cash
flow projections in line with the guideline set out in the circular.
Release of funds to meet expenditure.
46. (1) The basis for requisition of funds for grant of credit on the account of the
accounting officer for authorization of a withdrawal by the Controller of Budget from the
national exchequer account shall be based on the approved cash flow plans communicated to
that accounting officer to the National Treasury.
(2) Release of Funds from the Consolidated Fund to national government entities shall
be in accordance with the authority granted by the Controller of Budget together with the
written instructions of the National Treasury.
(3) The National Treasury shall make requisition from the Controller of Budget as
necessary for the exchequer withdrawal of funds which shall be placed to the credit of an
accounting officers' entity account.
(4) Pursuant to the grant of credit in paragraph (3), the National Treasury shall issue an
exchequer notification informing the accounting officer of the amounts authorized.
(5) The National Treasury may require accounting officers to review their cash flow
plans in line with changes in revenue realization, shortfalls in borrowing and unforeseen
expenditures.
(6) The National Treasury shall publish and publicize the quarterly liquidity position
reports reflecting the impact of revenue collection efforts, spending and public debt
operations on the cash position of government.

-- 549 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 551
[Subsidiary]
Budget Variation.
47. (1) The Accounting Officer shall inform his or her responsible Cabinet Secretary
immediately of any circumstances that are likely to affect materially the budgetary results
either through revenue and expenditure or other receipts and payments of the national
government entity.
(2) The Accounting Officer shall inform his or her responsible Cabinet Secretary of actions
taken to mitigate any budget variations.
(3) The responsible Cabinet Secretary shall take the necessary steps to bring to the notice
of the Cabinet Secretary, any warnings of significant or material budget variations.
Budget reallocation.
48. (1) For purposes of section 43(3) of the Act, Accounting Officers, may authorize
reallocation of funds within programmes or sub-votes provided that—
(a) this does not affect the total voted provision;
(b) the provisions in the budget of the programme or sub-vote from within which the
funds are to be transferred are unlikely to be utilized;
(c) reallocation is in accordance with donor conditions in the case of reallocation
impacting on donor-funded expenditure;
(d) the reallocation does not affect the voted provisions from wage to non-wage
expenditure or from capital to recurrent expenditure; and
(e) allocations earmarked by the National Treasury for a specific purpose may not be
used for other purposes, except with Treasury's approval.
(2) Accounting Officers shall keep a register of all budgetary reallocations and use it to
prepare a report of all reallocations to the National Treasury not later than the 10th day of
each month and the report shall state measures taken by the Accounting Officer to mitigate
against future reallocations.
(3) The report referred to in paragraph (2) shall state the impact that the reallocations
may have had on program objectives, planned program outputs and outcomes.
(4) The National Treasury shall consolidate all reallocations and include them in the next
revised budget.
(5) The reallocations under this regulation shall be approved by the respective Accounting
Officer of the entity.
Reallocation between programmes and sub-votes.
49. The reallocations by the National Treasury in terms of section 43(2) of the Act shall be
included in the next revised budget for submission to and approval by the National Assembly.
Advances from the Contingencies Fund.
50. (1) For an accounting officer to access the contingencies fund in accordance with
section 21 of the Act, that accounting officer shall first identify resources within his or her
vote through identification of savings for re-allocation before applying for financing from the
Contingencies Fund.
(2) If an accounting officer is satisfied that there are no savings within his or her vote and
the need meets the criteria set under section 21 of the Act and paragraph (1), the accounting
officer shall—
(a) give reasons why he or she believes the need meets the criteria under section 21
of the Act;

-- 550 of 625 --

552 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) issue a certificate, countersigned by the Cabinet Secretary of that entity, confirming
that the need meets the criteria under section 21 of the Act and paragraph (1); and
(c) submit the request to the Cabinet Secretary for consideration.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall consider the request and assess if the need meets the
criteria set under section 21 of the Act and may approve it or reject it.
Commitment for goods or services.
51. (1) All commitments for supply of goods or services shall be done not later than May
31st each year except with the express approval of the accounting officer in writing.
(2) Expenditure commitments for goods and services shall be controlled against spending
and procurement plans approved by the responsible Accounting Officer, based on allocations
and allotments from approved budgets.
(3) The Accounting Officer of that government entity shall make an expenditure
commitment only against the procurement plan approved for that entity in accordance
with the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act (Cap. 412C) and the Regulations made
thereunder.
(4) At minimum, a procurement plan shall include proper descriptions of the procuring
items, unit cost, the estimated contract value, and the procurement method relating to the
annual portion of a multi-year contract and delivery schedule.
(5) Any changes to approved procurement plan during the year shall be approved by the
responsible Accounting Officer in consultation with the Cabinet Secretary of the entity.
(6) Any public officer who contravenes the provisions of this regulation commits an
offence.
Vote Control Procedure.
52. Any public officer who holds any post involving, in any degree, the management of
public funds, and in particular every officer to whom is delegated the power to expend or
receive such funds shall in the Government's interest and in his own interest, be aware of the
essentials of vote control procedures—
(a) no public officer can spend or commit funds until he or she has been properly
authorized by means of an Authority to Incur Expenditure (AIE) to do so;
(b) AIE holders shall be made to understand that the limit to which they may spend is
that prescribed by the authority and not their expectations, however justified these
may seem;
(c) the AIE issued to a public officer shall in the minimum contain—
(i) the AIE number and to whom it is issued;
(ii) the authorized total expenditure;
(iii) a description of the expenditure item; and
(iv) the account code to which the expenditure is to be debited;
(d) when the AIE is issued by the Ministry or State Department or Agency, the
allocation shall be entered as a commitment in the Ministry's or State Department's
or Agency's master vote book so as to ascertain at all times the availability of
uncommitted funds;
(e) accounting officers whose votes cover field programmes and projects shall issue
AIE's to their field officers not later the 15th day of each quarter;

-- 551 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 553
[Subsidiary]
(f) public officers issued with AIE's shall also be informed in writing that the actual
expenditures should not exceed the limits authorized in the AIE's;
(h) all AIE's to field public officers shall show the following details at the minimum
and copies submitted to the Internal Audit Department of the National Treasury
and the Auditor-General—
(i) the gross total amount of funds per vote allocated and applied against the
AIE issued; and
(ii) the total amount of AIA to be collected;
(j) each accounting officer shall cause records to be kept in such a form as shall clarify
at any time, in respect of each of his or her votes—
(i) the total amount of expenditure sanctioned for service of the year;
(ii) the amount of the expenditure charged; and
(iii) any further known liabilities in respect of the year;
(k) the AIE holders shall note the following in terms of control of expenditure—
(i) there shall be no divided responsibility and only the officer to whom the AlE
has been issued is permitted to commit or incur expenditure against it; and
(ii) an AIE holder shall not wait for suppliers to submit invoices in order to
clear his or her commitment, but he or she shall regularly have his or her
outstanding commitments checked and enquiries made from the suppliers,
particularly in the last three months of the financial year.
Receipt of goods and services beyond the stipulated period.
53. (1) A local purchase order or local service order shall be valid for a period of thirty
days from the date of issue.
(2) Any public officer who receives goods or services beyond the stipulated period specified
in paragraph (1) commits an offence under the Act.
(3) Any public officer involved in the processing of a payment with regard to goods or
services delivered after due date shall inform the accounting officer of this anomaly before
proceeding to process the payment.
(4) The public officer in charge who fails to ensure the local service order or local purchase
order is cancelled after thirty days commits an offence under the Act.
Unauthorized spending.
54. (1) Except as provided for in the Act and these Regulations, an Accounting Officer of
an entity may not authorize payment to be made out of funds earmarked for specific activities
for purposes other than those activities.
(2) A public officer who makes a payment contrary to paragraph (1) commits an offence
under the Act.
Monthly reporting obligations by Accounting Officers.
55. (1) An Accounting Officer of a national government entity shall not later than the
10th day of each month submit a monthly financial and non-financial budgetary report in the
format to be issued by the Cabinet Secretary relating to the activities of his or her national
government entity for the preceding month to the National Treasury with copies to the
Controller of Budget and the Auditor-General.
(2) The contents of the report under paragraph (1) shall include—
(a) actual revenues, including appropriations in aid;

-- 552 of 625 --

554 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) actual expenditures classified in economic classification as follows—
(i) compensation to employees;
(ii) use of goods and services;
(iii) transfer to other levels of government;
(iv) capital expenditure;
(c) pending payments with an age of over ninety days;
(d) a projection of expected expenditure and revenue collection for the remainder of
the financial year;
(e) when necessary, an explanation of any material variances; and
(f) a summary of the steps that are to be taken to ensure that the projected expenditure
and revenue remain within budget.
Contracts with multi-year financial implications.
56. (1) A national government entity may enter into a contract which will impose financial
obligations on the national government entity beyond a financial year.
(2) Contracts imposing financial obligations in excess of one year may only be concluded
by the accounting officer only if—
(a) the accounting officer discloses all finalized and signed contracts by the beginning
of a financial year;
(b) they are budgeted for first before new projects are budgeted by the accounting
officer of the national government entity; and
(c) the accounting officers secure the resources required in line with the financing
requirements set out in the contracts.
Reorganization of government functions.
57. (1) The national government may make policy changes in a financial year leading to—
(a) creation of an additional Ministry or State Department and national government
entities;
(b) transferring certain functions or services of an existing Ministry, State Department
and agencies to—
(i) another existing Ministry, State Department, or Agency;
(ii) a new Ministry or State Department or Agency;
(c) abolition of an existing Ministry or State Department or Agency and transferring
its functions or services to one or more Ministry or State Department or Agency.
(2) Before embarking on accounting entries and other adjustments, it shall be necessary
to agree on the actual status of the vote in respect of the following aspects of the affected
functions and services based on the ledger balances of a trial balance to be drawn on a date
to be communicated by the National Treasury—
(a) the gross budgetary provision;
(b) the approved A.I.A, if any, and whether in cash or credit purchase;
(c) the approved development partner assistance and entity own revenue whether in
cash or credit purchase, if any;
(d) the net budgetary provision;

-- 553 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 555
[Subsidiary]
(e) the gross expenditure incurred;
(f) the amount of entity own revenue and development partner assistance applied in
cash or in credit purchases; and
(g) the sharing of amounts held in the below-the-line group of accounts.
(3) When a Ministry or State Department or Agency is abolished, its vote shall cease to
function and consequently it shall be necessary to extract a trial balance as at the date of
abolition and to ascertain the state of financial affairs of that vote which shall include—
(a) the budgetary provision;
(b) expenditure incurred; and
(c) cash balance.
(4) The statement shall be accompanied by analysis of the below the line group of account
on the basis of which it should then be agreed on the amount of the related budget provision,
expenditure incurred and the below the line balances to be shared out, if necessary.
(5) The Supplementary Appropriation Act shall provide the details of the affected votes
and the National Treasury shall inform the affected Accounting Officers of the effective
date when they shall effect accounting entries in their books and other necessary inter-vote
adjustments.
(6) The book-keeping entries of a new vote shall be affected as outlined in the National
Treasury Guidelines issued.
PART VI – MANAGEMENT OF REVENUE AND OTHER RECEIPTS
Classification of Government Revenues.
58. (1) Government receipts may be classified into domestic receipts and external receipts.
(2) Domestic receipts under paragraph (1) shall comprise of—
(a) domestic loans receipts;
(b) tax revenues; and
(c) non tax revenues including exchequer, non tax receipts and Appropriation- in-Aid.
(3) External receipts under paragraph (1) shall comprise of—
(a) external Loans including exchequer loan receipts and direct payments or credit
purchase; and
(b) external grants including exchequer grant receipts and direct payments.
Format of estimates of revenue.
59. (1) The estimates of revenues shall be in the format issued by the National Treasury
and shall include—
(a) the description of the source of revenue in terms of head code;
(b) estimated revenues;
(c) the receiver of revenue;
(d) for each revenue head, there shall be shown revenue items; and
(e) the amounts and the nature of receipts.

-- 554 of 625 --

556 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The estimates of revenue shall include the actual revenue for the two previous financial
years (N-2) (N-1), the current financial year revenue estimates (N), and the projected revenue
estimates for the next two outer years (N+1) and (N+2).
Basic principles in deciding whether sums shall be applied as AIA.
60. (1) The following shall be the basic principles in deciding whether sums shall be
applied as Appropriation-in-Aid—
(a) receipts arising directly out of expenditure on a service, the primary purpose of
which is not collection of revenue such as user fees, user charges, or sale of stores
and may be Appropriated-In-Aid of the vote from which expenditure on the service
is met;
(b) Appropriations-in-Aid shall be applied against a vote;
(c) where miscellaneous receipts are individually and collectively small, and
circumstances of receipt unimportant in themselves, such receipts may be credited
to Appropriations-in-Aid; and
(d) sums due as Appropriations-in-Aid in the previous year shall be credited to the
Appropriations in Aid head of the year in which they are actually received.
(2) Despite the provision under paragraph (1), the Cabinet Secretary may designate any
type of Appropriations-in-Aid as revenue in furtherance of certain government policies.
Main forms of receipts in development estimates.
61. The following shall be the main forms of receipts which occur in development
estimates—
(a) Appropriations-in-Aid inform of receipts collected by any authorized national
government agency or derived from the sale of goods and services directly derived
from projects contained in the appropriate expenditure head;
(b) direct payments or Credit Purchases charged to the appropriate head representing
expenditure on the cost of goods or services supplied and credited to the national
government entity, but such transactions may be carried out only after National
Treasury's advice;
(c) loan and grant receipts through the national exchequer account; and
(d) Tax and non-tax revenue through the national exchequer account.
Receiver of revenue.
62. (1) A receiver of revenue designated by the Cabinet Secretary under section 75 of the
Act shall be responsible for the collection of, and accounting for, such items of revenue as the
Cabinet Secretary may specify.
(2) A letter for the designation of receiver of revenue under paragraph (1) shall indicate his
or her responsibility and the manner in which he or she may delegate the duties of collection
of revenue to officers under him or her or of another national government entity.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (2), the receiver of revenue for loans
and grants funds shall be the Principal Secretary to the National Treasury, and the Cabinet
Secretary shall specify such items of revenue in the designation letter.
Collector of revenue.
63. (1) In accordance with section 76 of the Act, the receiver of revenue shall authorize
a public officer or any of the national government entities to be a collector of revenue for

-- 555 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 557
[Subsidiary]
national government for the collection of, and accounting for, such items of revenue as the
receiver of revenue may specify.
(2) Except with the specific authority of the collector of revenue, in no case may a
public officer whose duty involves the posting of assessment registers, rent rolls and similar
documents be authorised to collect public moneys or to post collections into a cash book.
Responsibility for revenue management.
64. (1) An accounting officer and a receiver of revenue are personally responsible for
ensuring that—
(a) adequate safeguards exist and are applied for the prompt collection and proper
accounting for, all national government revenue and other public moneys relating
to their Ministries, departments or agencies;
(b) adequate measures, including legal action where appropriate, are taken to obtain
payment;
(c) official receipts are issued for all moneys paid to Government of Kenya.
(2) An accounting officer or receiver of revenue who experiences difficulty in collecting
revenues due to the national government shall report the circumstances to the Cabinet
Secretary without delay.
(3) Except with the authority of the Cabinet Secretary, no receiver of revenue or collector
of revenue, may convert public moneys received in local currency into foreign currency and
vice versa.
(4) All public moneys collected by a receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or collected
and retained by a national government entity, shall be paid into the designated bank accounts
of the national government and shall not be used by any public officer in any manner between
the time of their receipts and payment into the bank except as provided by law.
(5) An Accounting Officer or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue shall take
disciplinary measures in line with the relevant legislation against a public officer who
contravenes the provisions of paragraph (4).
(6) An accounting officer or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue shall ensure
adequate books of accounts are kept relating to revenue collection and management.
(7) A public officer who makes payment from monies collected under this regulation
commits an offence under the Act.
In-year reporting of revenue collection.
65. (1) The Accounting Officer or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue shall prepare
a quarterly report not later than the 15th day after the end of the quarter.
(2) The quarterly report in paragraph (1) shall include—
(a) a statement of receipts and disbursements in such form as the Public Sector
Accounting Standards Board may determine;
(b) a statement of arrears of revenue which shall be classified by financial year; and
(c) reasons for material differences between approved estimates and the actual
revenue collected.
(3) The accounting officer or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue shall include in
the report under paragraph (1), the following details in respect of each waiver or variation—
(a) the full name of each person benefiting from the waiver or variation;
(b) the amount of tax, fee or charge affected by the waiver or variation;

-- 556 of 625 --

558 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) the year to which the waiver or variation relates;
(d) the reasons for the waiver or variation; and
(e) the law in terms of which the waiver or variation was granted.
(4) The quarterly report under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the National Treasury
with a copy to the Auditor-General and to Parliament.
[L.N. 229/2015, r. 7.]
Fees for services rendered by the national government.
66. (1) The Accounting Officer of a national government entity may, when finalising their
budgets, review all fees, charges or the rates, scales or tariffs of fees and charges that are not
fixed by any law, and that relate to revenue accruing to the Consolidated Fund.
(2) An Accounting Officer shall obtain approval from the National Treasury for the
proposed tariff structure.
(3) Information on the tariff structure shall be disclosed in the annual report, including
information on exemptions, discounts, free services and any other aspect of material influence
on the revenue yield.
Agency services and revenue management.
67. (1) When a national government entity renders agency services to another national
government entity or a county government, all revenue receipts collected shall be accounted
for fully by the agent to the receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or accounting officer.
(2) Any exception to paragraph (1) on the expenses arising from the revenue
administration costs shall be expressly agreed between the national government entity and
the respective receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or accounting officer based a service
level agreement signed between them.
(3) When a national government entity renders agency services to a county government all
revenue receipts including agency receipts collected shall be accounted for fully by the agent
to the receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or accounting officer and the expenses arising
from the revenue administration costs shall be agreed between the national government
entity and the respective county government based a service level agreement signed between
them.
(4) When a county government entity renders agency services to a national government
entity, all revenue receipts including agency receipts collected shall be accounted for fully
by the agent to the receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or accounting officer and the
expenses arising from the revenue administration costs shall be agreed between the county
government and the respective receiver of revenue or collector of revenue or accounting based
a service level agreement signed between them.
(5) Claims for agency services rendered on behalf of another government entity, level
of government, shall be based on actual revenue collected and accounted for and shall be
supported by original vouchers and shall be reflected in their books of accounts of transacting
institutions.
Refund of Revenue.
68. (1) Refunds of revenue may become necessary because of collections or over-
collections made in error or because, although properly collected in accordance with an Act or
regulation, provision exists under the Act or regulation for the revenue to be reclaimed under
certain circumstances in the form of a rebate or drawback.

-- 557 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 559
[Subsidiary]
(2) Refunds of revenue and drawbacks under paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with
the relevant legislation.
(3) Any refunds under paragraph (1) shall be provided for under an expenditure item
appropriated by Parliament in an Appropriation Act.
(4) Where the collection, over-collection or drawback is made in the same financial year
as that in which the revenue was originally collected it may be authorised by the officer
prescribed in the relevant legislation to be charged as a debit item in the appropriate revenue
head.
(5) The receiver or collector of revenue shall together with the refunds in paragraph (1)
include assumptions underpinning the refund estimates.
(6) The estimates of refunds submitted under paragraph (5) by the receiver or collector of
revenue shall include assumptions underpinning the refund estimates.
Format of annual and quarterly statements submitted.
69. The annual, quarterly and monthly statements by a receiver of revenue submitted to
the National Treasury under section 76(3) of the Act shall be in the format to be gazetted by
the Cabinet Secretary and shall at the minimum include—
(a) the actual revenue received by the receiver and transmitted to the national
exchequer account;
(b) the actual revenue received by the receiver and not transmitted to the national
exchequer account;
(c) the revenue arrears due but not collected; and
(d) a responsibility statement by the receiver of revenue on the revenue statement.
PART VII – MANAGEMENT OF GRANTS AND DONATIONS
Definition of terms.
70. For purposes of this Part—
(a) "grant agreement" means an instrument that gives the power to an agency to
furnish money, property or materials to a grantee and the grantee has freedom to
pursue the grants stated purpose, but the agency does not specify the matter of
performance of the work and is not substantially involved in it;
(b) "financing agreements" are a document detailing commitments for provision of
goods, services and activities to be performed by an organisation for the awarding
agency and contain specific objectives, direction, specifications, costs or methods
of performance; and
(c) "donor or development partner or external financier" is used in this Part
interchangeably to refer to the providers of external resources.
Grants, donations and sponsorships.
71. (1) Upon approval by the Cabinet Secretary, an Accounting Officer may receive
any grants, donation, sponsorship made in favour of the government entity irrespective of
whether such sponsorship or grants or donation is in cash or in kind provided that the
Accounting Officer confirms with the relevant national government entity that donations
given in kind are—
(a) not harmful to health and the environment; and
(b) in good and serviceable condition.

-- 558 of 625 --

560 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) All cash grants, donations or sponsorships shall be deposited in the Consolidated Fund
provided that—
(a) such grants, donation and sponsorship are from a credible source from a person in
good standing with the Government of Kenya;
(b) such grants, donation and sponsorship are intended to address government
development policies.
(3) Where the purpose of the grant, donation, or sponsorship is not apparent, the Cabinet
Secretary shall have the discretion to instruct the Accounting Officers on its application.
(4) A national government entity is not allowed to give another national government
entity cash donations to augment the budgetary resources of designated departments.
(5) Grant, donations or sponsorships received during the year shall be disclosed in the
annual and quarterly financial statements.
Grants administration.
72. (1) Projects implemented through grants, donations and sponsorships shall be aligned
to the national development policies.
(2) In identification and designing of projects funded by development partners, the areas
covered and amounts allocated shall be determined by objective criteria and as far as possible
on need-based formula which may include geographical area, population and poverty index.
(3) The Accounting officer shall disclose the details under paragraph (2).
(4) All grants and donations shall be appropriated by national assembly before
commencement of disbursements.
(5) Issues to do with tax exemptions, issuance of work permits, counter-part personnel,
counter-part funding, office space, demand driven technical assistance, community
contribution either in cash or in kind shall be clearly spelt out in the grant agreements, and
the government and community contribution shall be properly assessed and quantified in all
grant supported projects.
(6) National government shall ensure grants are factored in the budgets and counterpart
funds appropriated accordingly.
Disclosure of authorization and disbursement.
73. (1) Where authorisation has been granted for the project to start, the Accounting
Officer shall ensure public disclosure to the intended beneficiaries within thirty days of the
allocation and disbursement of the grants.
(2) After disbursement of grants, the accounting officer shall report within fifteen
days after the end of each quarter to the intended beneficiaries on the expenditures and
performance achieved in relation to the grant.
(3) During the project identification and design, the intended beneficiaries shall be
involved through public participatory approach for planning.
(4) The views of the indented beneficiaries shall be received during public forums provided
for under paragraph (3) and their views shall be considered appropriately or during budgeting
process of the next budget cycle.
(5) Where non-compliance by an accounting officer with grant conditions is established
through an audit or fiduciary review process, the Cabinet Secretary may suspend the
disbursements and institute measures to recover any amounts misappropriated by the public
officer.

-- 559 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 561
[Subsidiary]
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING ON DONATIONS AND GRANTS
Monies received by way of grants and donations to be paid into a designated account.
74. (1) All monies received by way of grants and donations shall constitute public monies
and shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall make provisions in the budget estimates for grants and
donations receivable in kind such as commodity aid for purposes of raising cash locally.
(3) Where the quantum of the grant or donation referred to in paragraph (2) is not known,
a provision shall be included in the estimates and when the quantum becomes known a
supplementary estimate shall be raised for the amount involved.
(4) Where grants and donations are receivable in kind, the value of such donations shall
be determined and included in the estimate and reflected as expenditure in the financial year.
(5) Monies received for specified projects which have been paid into the Consolidated
Fund shall be released when required to the appropriate project bank account.
(6) An accounting officer of a national government entity shall—
(a) cause to be kept and maintained proper books of accounts and records in respect
of all projects and donations;
(b) ensure that whenever projects are completed, the project assets including
buildings, plant, vehicles, furniture, fittings and equipment are properly recorded
and handed over to the accounting officer in accordance with the financing
agreement;
(c) where no time frame is provided for the project, ensure that the assets are handed
over within three months from the date of the closure of the project; and
(d) in the absence of any instructions to the contrary, ensure that any unexpended
balance standing in the credit of the project account is paid into the Consolidated
Fund.
Project selection criteria.
75. It shall be the responsibility of the National Treasury to ensure that—
(a) any project approved for financing through grants and donations has been
approved by the accounting officer; and
(b) the project feasibility study report has been inspected and approved by the relevant
national government entity.
Project bank accounts.
76. (1) For the purpose of disbursement of project funds, there shall be opened and
maintained a project account for every project at Central Bank of Kenya unless it is exempted
by the Cabinet Secretary, in writing, into which all funds shall be kept and such an account
shall be known by the name of the project for which it is opened and each project shall
maintain only one bank account.
(2) All foreign currency designated bank accounts shall be kept at the Central Bank of
Kenya for national government entities unless exempted in writing by the Cabinet Secretary
under paragraph (1).
(3) Every payment or instruction for payment out of the project account shall be strictly
on the basis of the approved estimates of budget and financing agreement.

-- 560 of 625 --

562 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Records of receipts and disbursements.
77. The Accounting Officer of a project shall compile and maintain a record showing all
receipts, disbursements and actual expenditure on a monthly basis in respect of every project
and subproject and shall—
(a) make monthly interim financial returns;
(b) make quarterly financial management returns; and
(c) submit a summary of the records for each quarter and year to the division
responsible for external resources in the National Treasury not later than fifteen
(15) days after the end of every quarter.
Responsibilities of NGOs where the project is implemented by NGO.
78. (1) Non Governmental Organisations (NGO’s) that implement development programs
funded by public funds, including donor funding shall be accountable through regular
financial reporting and submission of audited annual financial statements to the relevant
accounting officer in a format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
(2) NGO's referred to under paragraph (1) shall be registered by the responsible national
licensing authority and in accordance with the relevant law under which that authority is
established.
Documents to be attached by NGOs where the project is implemented by NGO.
79. (1) Documents to be attached to the financial reports and annual audited accounts in
regulation 78 shall include a certificate of registration confirming that the NGO—
(a) is a body corporate and separate from its members, with perpetual succession;
(b) can engage in public interest activities and public fundraising throughout Kenya;
and
(c) is eligible for such fiscal or other benefits and privileges, as may be applicable to
NGOs from time to time.
(2) In addition to requirements under paragraph (1), the NGO shall also submit—
(a) its annual performance report outlining the activities undertaken by the NGO in
the year;
(b) an annual return reflecting details of its trustees, directors, office bearers and
auditors;
(c) its sources of funding;
(d) in the event of any amendment to its Constitution or governance instrument during
the financial year, a certified copy of such amendment; and
(e) any such other information the NGO considers necessary.

-- 561 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 563
[Subsidiary]
PART VIII – TREASURY AND CASH MANAGEMENT
CONSOLIDATED FUND
Composition of the Consolidated Fund.
80. (1) The National Treasury shall administer the Consolidated Fund in accordance with
the constitutional provisions in Articles 206 and 209 (1), (2) and (4) in controlling revenue
receipts to ensure that—
(a) all revenue receipts by the national government are paid into the national
exchequer account, except revenue receipts reasonably excluded by the
Constitution, the Act, or another Act of Parliament; and
(b) withdrawals from the Consolidated Fund shall be done—
(i) in accordance with an appropriation by an Act of Parliament;
(ii) in accordance with Articles 222 or 223 of the Constitution;
(iii) as a direct charge against the Consolidated Fund as authorised by the
Constitution or an Act of Parliament.
(2) The administrator of the Consolidated Fund shall keep proper books of accounts of the
Consolidated Fund in accordance with standards and formats prescribed by the Public Sector
Accounting Standards Board.
Process of receipts into Consolidated Fund.
81. (1) Receivers of Revenue shall promptly deposit into National Exchequer Account all
receipts due to the Consolidated Fund.
(2) The Receivers of Revenue shall promptly pay the revenue received into the
Consolidated Fund as soon as possible and in any case not later than five (5) days after receipt
thereof.
(3) The National Treasury shall issue a receipt to a Receiver of Revenue to acknowledge
the receipt of revenue thereof.
CASH AND BANKING ARRANGEMENTS
Criteria for approval of opening and operating national government entities bank accounts.
82. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 28 of the Act, the following criteria shall be
considered by the National Treasury before granting approval to a national government entity
to open and operate a national government bank account—
(a) all national government bank accounts shall be opened at the Central Bank of
Kenya, except—
(i) where the Central Bank of Kenya has no branch;
(ii) it is expressly provided for under a financing agreement and with approval
of the Cabinet Secretary;
(iii) where Central Bank of Kenya has confirmed in writing it is unable to offer
banking facilities;
(iv) where the National Treasury has granted authority to an accounting officer
or receiver of revenue or collector of revenue to open and operate a bank
account in a commercial bank for purposes of revenue collection, and that
commercial bank shall have a wide branch network and is government
linked;
(b) any national government entity which draws over seventy five (75) percent of
its resources from the National Exchequer Account shall apply for opening and

-- 562 of 625 --

564 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
operating bank accounts at the Central Bank of Kenya, unless exempted under
paragraph (1).
(2) Where a national government entity is unable to comply with the provisions under
paragraph (1), it may apply for grant of Cabinet Secretary approval to open and operate a bank
account in a commercial bank under special circumstances.
(3) All national government entities operating bank accounts outside the provisions of
paragraph (1) of this regulation, shall comply with the provisions under paragraph (1) within
six (6) months from upon publication of these Regulations.
(4) Except with the prior authority of the National Treasury, no accounting officer may
open a bank account for the deposit, custody or withdrawal of public moneys or other moneys
for which he or she is responsible in his or her official capacity or for the transaction of official
banking business.
(5) The authority of National Treasury shall be conveyed in writing to the responsible
Accounting Officer with a copy to the Controller of Budget and the Auditor-General.
(6) National Treasury may prescribe the banking rules and the maximum balance which
may be held in any official Treasury Single Account sub-account or other bank accounts, and
if at any time this balance seems likely to be exceeded the officer operating the accounts shall
consult National Treasury on the action to be taken.
(7) No official government bank account shall be overdrawn, nor shall any advance or
loan be obtained from a bank account for official purposes beyond the limit, authorized by the
National Treasury in line with section 28(4) of the Act.
(8) The authority in paragraph (7) shall be conveyed in writing to the responsible
Accounting Officer and copied to the Auditor-General.
(9) Personal cheques shall not be deposited in an official bank account.
Guiding principles for cash management.
83. (1) The National Treasury shall be responsible for establishing sound cash
management systems, procedures and processes, to ensure efficient and effective banking and
cash management practices.
(2) For purposes of this regulation, sound cash management includes—
(a) assessing the cash inflows and outflows expected at any one time;
(b) ensuring payments, including transfers to other levels of government and national-
government entities are made when due for efficient, effective and economical
programme delivery and the government's normal terms for account;
(c) avoiding accumulation of idle balances;
(d) using short term borrowing only when it is necessary;
(e) avoiding prepayments for goods or services unless required by the contractual
arrangements with the supplier;
(f) accepting discounts to effect early payment only when the payment has been
included in the monthly cash flow estimates provided to the National Treasury;
(g) pursuing debtors with appropriate sensitivity and rigour to ensure that amounts
receivable by the government are collected and banked promptly;
(h) recognising the time value of money and managing inventories to the minimum
level necessary for efficient and effective programme delivery, and selling surplus
or under-utilised assets.

-- 563 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 565
[Subsidiary]
(3) National government overdraft at the Central Bank of Kenya shall be retired by the
end of the financial year.
Surrender of End-Year Surplus Cash Balances.
84. Not later than the 31st January each year, each Accounting Officer shall surrender to
the National Exchequer Account unexpended voted money or excess Appropriations-in-Aid,
as confirmed by Auditor-General in the audit report.
Cheques and electronic payments.
85. (1) All signatories in respect of cheques, or electronic payments and fund transfers
shall be designated by the Accounting Officer and any changes in signatories shall be
authorized by him.
(2) There shall be two authorized signatories to sign a cheque drawn or electronic payment
or fund transfer on a national government bank account.
(3) The names and designation of those officers in paragraph (1) and their specimen
signatures shall be advised to the bank where the account is held by the accounting officer,
with copies of the advice sent to the National Treasury, and any change in signatories shall
be advised in writing.
(4) The signatories under this regulation shall—
(a) initial the counterfoil or enter with their personal passwords;
(b) be equally responsible for the regularity of the payment; and
(c) thoroughly scrutinize the documents supporting the payment.
(5) Spoilt cheques shall be marked prominently with the stamp "Cancelled", and fixed
securely to the cheque-list used for controlling the cheques issued each day.
Cash Management Advisory Committee.
86. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may establish a Cash Management Advisory Committee.
(2) The Cash Management Advisory Committee established under paragraph (1) shall be
comprised of—
(a) the Principal Secretary of the National Treasury who shall be the chair person or
an officer designated by him or her;
(b) the department responsible for matters relating to accounting policy within the
Nat
(c) the department responsible for matters relating to economic affairs in the National
Treasury;
(d) the office of the public debt management in the National Treasury; and
(e) the department responsible for matters relating to budget matters in the National
Treasury.
(3) The responsibilities of the Cash Management Advisory Committee shall be determined
by the Cabinet Secretary during its establishment.
Registers and records of government bank accounts.
87. (1) The office of the Accountant-General shall maintain a register of all Treasury Single
Account sub-accounts and other bank accounts opened by national government entities,
including public funds and donor funded projects.

-- 564 of 625 --

566 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The office of the Accountant-General shall reconcile periodically with the government
bank accounts list, maintained by the Central Bank of Kenya.
(3) The Accounting Officer of a national government entity shall, by the 30th September
of each year, provide the National Treasury with an up-dated list of bank accounts held by the
national government entity.
(4) The list referred to under paragraph (3) shall include the following information—
(a) name of the bank where the account is held;
(b) name of the bank account;
(c) type of bank account;
(d) signatories of the bank account;
(e) date on which the bank account was opened;
(f) the bank account number;
(g) purpose for the bank Account, if different from the main operational bank account
of the government entity;
(h) the bank account balances as at 30th June each year; and
(i) the reference number and date of the National Treasury, letter granting approval
for opening and operating the bank account.
Authority to have access to government bank accounts.
88. (1) The National Treasury, shall when granting authority to Accounting Officers to
open and operate bank accounts, require them to include as a pre-condition to that bank, that
the Cabinet Secretary may request bank statements for that account without any reference to
the authorized bank signatories of that bank account.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary may suspend the operations of any government bank account
or impose certain conditions, if he or she reasonably believes the purpose of that account no
longer exists, or that fraud or fraudulent transactions are being undertaken in that specific
account and shall institute investigations immediately.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary may, where in his or her opinion finds it necessary, share the
report of the investigation carried out in paragraph (2) with the Auditor-General and the
Controller of Budget.
Security for cash in transit.
89. The Accounting Officers shall ensure that adequate arrangements are made to protect
both cash and staff for cash in transit and such measures shall include the following—
(a) safe or strong rooms and restricted access to the cash handling locations;
(b) police or armed security escorts;
(c) the security bags locked to the vehicle; and
(d) suitable transport and variation of movement, times, and routes.
Reconciliation of bank accounts.
90. (1) Accounting Officers shall ensure bank accounts reconciliations are completed
for each bank account held by that Accounting Officer, every month and submit a bank
reconciliation statement not later than the 10th of the subsequent month to the National
Treasury with a copy to the Auditor-General.

-- 565 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 567
[Subsidiary]
(2) Similar reconciliations shall be carried out when responsibility for any bank account
or cheque book is handed over from one officer to another and on the occasion of any surprise
inspection or survey.
(3) Accounting Officers shall ensure any discrepancies noted during bank reconciliation
exercise, are investigated immediately and appropriate action taken including updating the
relevant cash books.
(4) The National Treasury shall analyse and review the bank reconciliation statements
submitted under paragraph (3) of this regulation and take the necessary action.
MANAGING IMPREST TRANSACTIONS
Definition of imprest.
91. (1) For the purposes of this regulation and Regulations 92, 93, and 94, an imprest
means a form of cash advance or a float which the Accounting Officer may authorize to be
issued to officers who in the course of duty are required to make payments which cannot
conveniently be made through the cash office of a government entity or bank account.
(2) The officer authorized to hold and operate an imprest shall make formal application
for the imprest through an imprest warrant.
(3) Funds disbursed for imprest shall not be kept or held in an official bank account, but
in a separate or personal bank account operated by the imprest holder or in the form of cash
under safe.
Determination of imprest levels.
92. The Accounting Officer or AIE holder shall approve the establishment of an imprest
facility including the maximum amount for the specific purpose of that facility.
Classes of imprest.
93. (1) There shall be three types of imprests, namely—
(a) Temporary or Safari imprest;
(b) Standing Imprest; and
(c) Special imprest.
(2) An imprest shall be issued for a specific purpose, and any payments made from it, shall
be only for the purposes specified in the imprest warrant.
(3) Temporary imprests shall be issued mainly in respect of official journeys and are
intended to provide officers with funds with which they can meet travelling, accommodation
and incidental expenses.
(4) Before issuing temporary imprests under paragraph (2), the Accounting Officer shall
ensure that—
(a) the main objective of the journey cannot be achieved by other cheaper means;
(b) the applicant has no outstanding imprests;
(c) the applicant has been recorded in the imprest register including the amount
applied for;
(d) adequate funds are available against the relevant items of expenditure to meet the
proposed expenditure.
(5) A holder of a temporary imprest shall account or surrender the imprest within 7
working days after returning to duty station.

-- 566 of 625 --

568 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(6) In the event of the imprest holder failing to account for or surrender the imprest on
the due date, the Accounting Officer shall take immediate action to recover the full amount
from the salary of the defaulting officer with an interest at the prevailing Central Bank Rate.
(7) If the Accounting Officer does not recover the temporary imprest from the defaulting
officer as provided for in this regulation the Accounting Officer commits an offence as
provided for under the Act.
(8) In order to effectively and efficiently manage and control the issue of temporary
imprests, an accounting officer or AIE holder shall ensure that no second imprest is issued to
any officer before the first imprest is surrendered or recovered in full from his or her salary.
(9) If the accounting officer or AIE Holder fails to comply with the provisions of paragraph
(8), he or she commits an offence as provided for under the Act.
(10) If an imprest is to be recovered from any public officer by instalments, the Accounting
Officer shall personally authorize such recovery and such moneys shall no longer be an
imprest but an unauthorized advance from Government Funds, and in addition to the interest
charged under paragraph (6), the Accounting Officer shall take appropriate disciplinary action
against the officer concerned for the abuse of the imprest.
(11) Standing Imprest shall be intended to be in operation for a time and requires bringing
the cash level of the advance continuously up to the agreed fixed level by systematic re-
imbursement of expenses.
(12) Standing imprest shall involve personal responsibility as it shall be issued to an officer
in his or her own name, and not to the holder of an office.
(13) When an imprest holder leaves the service, or is transferred, he or she shall surrender
the total standing imprest which includes cash plus payment vouchers which together amount
to the fixed level of the imprest, and a new imprest issued to his or her successor.
(14) The holder of a standing imprest shall keep a memorandum cash book to record all
receipts and payments and the balance on hand shall agree with the cash balance recorded in
the cash book, and in the absence of any receipts, the actual cash balances plus the expenses
paid shall equal at all times the fixed level of the imprest for which the imprest holder is
personally responsible.
(15) When the imprest holder needs to have his or her funds replenished, he or she shall
send an abstract and analysis of his memorandum cash book, plus originals of the supporting
payment vouchers to accounts division.
(16) If the accounts division in paragraph (15) is satisfied that the expenditure has actually
been incurred, that it has been incurred for the intended purposes, and there is no irregularity
in the payment vouchers, it shall arrange for the analysed expenditure to be posted to the
various heads and items, and arrange for the cash to be transferred to the imprest holder so
as to "top-up" his or her fund.
(17) In addition to paragraph (16) the head of accounts division shall also ensure that
frequent spot checks are made of the standing imprest itself by a responsible officer as
follows—
(a) count the cash on hand;
(b) confirm that the actual cash on hand corresponds with the balance on hand as
recorded in the cash book;
(c) confirm that all movements (expenses and receipts) since the last check have been
properly recorded and are properly documented;

-- 567 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 569
[Subsidiary]
(d) ensure that the documents justify the difference between the fixed imprest level
and the actual cash balance; and
(e) report on any anomalies found to the head of the accounts section.
(18) Any Special Imprest utilized for any expenditure on services of a confidential
nature, the purpose add the particulars of which cannot be made public, shall be supported
by a certificate that the money has been paid, and a declaration by the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for the national government entity and the relevant Accounting Officer that they
have satisfied themselves that the money has been properly expended, and has not been used
to supplement the emoluments of any officer.
Duties of Imprest holders.
94. An officer holding an imprest shall ensure that—
(a) the imprest issued to him or her shall be used for the intended purpose only;
(b) the imprest moneys and any payment vouchers awaiting replenishment are
adequately safeguarded at all times;
(c) proper cash sale receipts are received for all payments out of the imprest;
(d) the full amount of the imprest can be accounted for at all times in cash, stamps,
money at bank and completed payment vouchers; and
(e) goods purchased through imprest are taken on charge and certificate issued.
TREASURY SINGLE ACCOUNT
Establishment of a Treasury Single Account.
95. (1) The National Treasury hereby establishes a Treasury Single Account (TSA)
pursuant to section 28(2) of the Act, which Account. shall become operational within six (6)
months upon commencement of these Regulations and shall be kept at the Central Bank of
Kenya.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall from time to time issue Treasury Single Account guidelines
to accounting officers for the operations of the Treasury Single Account.
Operation of a Treasury Single Account.
96. (1) The National Treasury shall ensure operating cash balances in the Treasury Single
Account sub-accounts are kept to a minimum through consolidation into a Treasury Single
Account.
(2) The Treasury Single Account shall reflect at the minimum the following features—
(a) unified banking arrangements to enable the National Treasury to have proper
oversight of national government cash inflows and outflows on these bank
accounts;
(b) that no national government entity shall operate bank accounts outside the
Treasury Single Account unless expressly authorized by the Cabinet Secretary;
(c) notwithstanding the requirement under sub-paragraph (b), the Cabinet Secretary
may authorize exemption from the requirements of sub-paragraph (b); and
(d) the comprehensive consolidation of government controlled public monies
encompassing all government cash resources, including National Exchequer
Account, special funds, trust funds and other public funds unless expressly
exempted by the Cabinet Secretary.

-- 568 of 625 --

570 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) National government deposits or exchequer releases to national government entities
by the National Treasury shall be deposited in the Treasury Single Account sub-accounts and
shall form part of cash balances of these accounts.
(4) Unless exempted by an Act of Parliament or by judicial order, all deposit bank accounts
of the national government's entities shall be sub-accounts of the Treasury Single Account
for the national governments.
PART IX – ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING
FORM AND BASIC STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS
Accounting period.
97. (1) The accounts of the national government entities shall record transactions which
take place during a financial year running from the 1st July to the 30th June.
(2) Government accounts may be kept open for adjustments or a financial year may be
kept open for a month in the following financial year for completion of the following end of
year accounting processes—
(a) in respect of the transactions of the 30th June each year to capture expenditure for
field services;
(b) for carrying out certain inter-departmental agency adjustments; and
(c) for closing the accounts of special funds and Suspense accounts.
(3) Adjustments may also be made after the close of the year by journal entries for
the correction of accounts due to miss-postings or mis-classifications impacting on fair
presentation of financial statements that may be noticed after 30th June each year.
(4) An actual cash transaction taking place after the 30th June, shall not, however, be
treated as pertaining to the previous financial year even though the accounts for that year
may be open for the purposes mentioned under paragraphs (2) and (3).
(5) The National Treasury shall issue guidelines on the closure of the financial year not
later than the 15th May of each year.
Charging of expenditure to year of accounts.
98. (1) The date of payment of any amount shall determine the date of the recording of
the transaction in the accounts.
(2) Advance payment shall not be paid to suppliers of services and goods unless provided
for in the contractual terms and conditions contained in a valid contract signed between the
procuring entity and the supplier.
Account codes and standard chart of accounts.
99. (1) As a general rule, the classification of financial transactions in national
government entity's accounts shall be based on the standard chart of accounts approved by
the National Treasury.
(2) The approved estimates of expenditure shall form the basis of the accounts for the
financial year.
(3) Every entry in the accounts shall be supported by a voucher or other approved
document gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary containing the full details, clear narrations and
particulars of the item or items to which it relates.

-- 569 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 571
[Subsidiary]
Books of accounts to be kept by Accounting Officers.
100. Accounting Officers shall keep in all offices concerned with receiving cash or making
payments a cash book showing the receipts and payments and shall maintain such other books
and registers as may be necessary for the proper maintenance and production of the accounts
of the Vote for which he or she is responsible.
Recording and reporting basis.
101. (1) The structure of the reporting formats shall be based on the requirements of the
Act.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary may from time to time amend the reporting formats in
accordance with the prescribed standards set by the Public Sector Accounting Standards
Board.
(3) The National Treasury shall issue financial instructions and guidelines on application
of accounting policies, bases, standards and classification to be applied in financial reporting
in line with the standards set by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
(4) An Accounting Officer shall prepare the financial statements in a form that complies
with the relevant accounting standards prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards
Board, not later than three months after the end of the financial year and submit them to the
Auditor General with a copy to the County Treasury, the Controller of Budget and the National
Treasury.
(5) Any expenditure on services of a confidential nature, the purpose and the particulars
of which cannot be made public, shall be supported in the accounts by a certificate that the
money has been paid, and a declaration by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for the national
government entity and the relevant Accounting Officer that they have satisfied themselves
that the money has been properly expended, and has not been used to supplement the
emoluments of any officer.
(6) For the purposes of this Regulation, an accounting officer shall only classify
expenditure as confidential expenditure, if the expenditure—
(a) is likely to prejudice the security, defence or international relations of the
Government of the Republic of Kenya;
(b) is likely to involve the disclosure of confidential deliberations or decisions of the
Cabinet or of a committee of the Cabinet;
(c) is likely to divulge any confidential information communicated in confidence by
the national government to a county government or by a county government to
the national government and which would prejudice national security or relations
between the two levels of government;
(d) would unfairly prejudice the commercial interests of anybody or person; and
(e) likely, for any other reason, to form the basis for a claim by a foreign state or persons
on the national government or county government in a judicial proceeding.
(7) The Accounting Officer shall be required under a closed door session, and is permitted,
to disclose to a special or joint committee of Parliament and the President information or any
other document on the nature of confidential expenditure under this Regulation.
Financial records and automation of financial operations.
102. (1) Financial records may be maintained in manual and or electronic form.

-- 570 of 625 --

572 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) An Accounting Officer shall take all reasonable precautions to guard against damage,
destruction of or falsification of any financial record required to be kept by the provisions of
the Act and these Regulations.
(3) An Accounting Officer shall satisfy himself or herself that where an alteration of a
financial record requires the authorization, approval and, or deletion of any transaction or
data whether electronic or manual by any means other than in writing, that there is sufficient
audit trail which shall identify the person who approved the transaction.
Accounting adjustments journal.
103. (1) Journal entries prepared for all adjustments shall be authorized by the accounting
officer or an officer designated by him or her before posting them in a financial record.
(2) In all cases journal vouchers shall be supported by sufficient explanations,
authorisations and documentation to facilitate accounting adjustments to be understood.
Vouchers.
104. (1) All receipts and payments vouchers of public moneys shall be properly supported
by pre-numbered receipt and payment vouchers and shall be supported by the appropriate
authority and documentation.
(2) All receipt and payment vouchers shall be or made out in indelible ink and shall contain
adequate narration of the particulars of the services, goods or works procured and being paid
for.
(3) All amounts appearing in a voucher shall be written in words as well as in figures.
Powers to delegate voucher approval.
105. (1) An Accounting Officer or any other officer delegated in writing by him or her
may authorize payment vouchers on his or her behalf for expenditure chargeable to his or her
vote, provided such expenditure is in respect of and within the provision of the services in a
National Treasury warrant, in accordance with law, regulations, tariff, contract or agreement
that may be applicable, and does not require special authority in terms of any law, regulation
or National Treasury instruction.
(2) Accounting Officers may prescribe the financial limits and other conditions within
which this authority in paragraph (1) may be exercised.
Deposit accounts.
106. Unless otherwise exempted by an Act of Parliament, any deposit which has
remained unclaimed for 5 years may, with the approval of the Cabinet Secretary, be paid
into Consolidated Fund and thereafter the Accountant-General may refund the deposit to any
person entitled thereto, if he or she is satisfied that the claim is authentic.
Clearance and suspense accounts.
107. (1) All the transactions relating to clearance and suspense accounts shall be
supported by authentic and verifiable source documents, clearly indicating the approved
allocation.
(2) Where it is necessary to account for revenue and expenditure transactions in a clearing
or suspense account, the Accounting Officer shall ensure that—
(a) amounts included in clearing or suspense accounts are cleared and correctly
allocated to the relevant cost centres on a monthly basis;
(b) monthly reconciliations are performed to confirm the balance of each account; and

-- 571 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 573
[Subsidiary]
(c) reports on uncleared items are prepared on a monthly basis and submitted to the
National Treasury.
(3) The National Treasury shall prescribe in the financial manual procedures to be used
for management of balances in suspense or clearing accounts.
Payments to beneficiaries residing outside Kenya.
108. Wherever practicable all payments of public monies made to persons outside Kenya
shall be made by direct payment or payment advice through the Central Bank of Kenya to such
persons' banks account or use of banker's draft or through the national payment system.
Use of electronic systems for financial operations.
109. (1) For efficient and effective utilization of electronic systems in processing financial
data, the National Treasury shall develop and regularly issue standard operating procedures
and instructions on the automated integrated financial management system operations, use
and maintenance.
(2) The Principal Secretary shall designate a person or persons in writing to administer
the automated integrated financial management system.
(3) The system administrator shall ensure compliance of assigned responsibilities and
when necessary take appropriate measures.
Restricted access to systems.
110. (1) The Accounting Officer for a national government entity shall institute
appropriate access controls needed to minimize breaches of information confidentiality, data
integrity and loss of business continuity.
(2) Access controls to be instituted shall include—
(a) uniform application forms for registration of new users, deregistration of users and
modification of user roles;
(b) processes of safeguarding completed application forms;
(c) segregation of duties;
(d) use of multi-factor authentication including standardization of user primary
identity linked to national identification numbers, payroll numbers and assigned
responsibilities; and
(e) utilization of appropriate password length for login.
(3) Users of the system under this regulation shall—
(a) not use or attempt to use the automated public financial management system
without the authorisation of the system administrator;
(b) take all reasonable steps to maintain the integrity of passwords and other security
mechanisms;
(c) where a password becomes insecure or potentially insecure, as soon as is
practicable, implement a new secure password;
(d) not do anything that damages, restricts, jeopardises, impairs or undermines the
performance, usability, reliability, confidentiality or accessibility of any digital
information system, programme, or other stored information data;
(e) not alter, delete or in any other way interfere with, any information, data or files;
(f) be responsible for any unlawful entry on the automated public financial
management system using such persons password;

-- 572 of 625 --

574 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(g) undertake any tasks assigned; and
(h) take all measures to ensure that on the last day of each month, the financial period
of the month is closed.
(4) Failure to adhere to the closing of financial periods or to adhere to operational
protocols in paragraph (3) shall be an offence under the Act.
Procedures for the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
111. (1) The Public Sector Accounting Standards Board shall be accountable to the Cabinet
Secretary for matters relating to finance for the effective, efficient and economical fulfilment
of its purpose and objectives.
(2) The Public Sector Accounting Standards Board shall prepare and submit to the Cabinet
Secretary a report indicating—
(a) their annual work plan demonstrating its priorities and agenda on how it intends
to meet its objectives and responsibilities for following financial year; and
(b) their annual activities demonstrating the extent to which its plans and mandate
were achieved.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary may from time to time request a report from the Public Sector
Accounting Standards Board on its mandate and such report shall be submitted within two
weeks from the date of the request.
PART X – EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL
Consolidated Fund Services.
112. (1) Where the Constitution or an Act of Parliament provides for some specific
categories of expenditure to be a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund, such expenditures
shall be included in the recurrent budget estimates of the national government as part of the
Consolidated Fund Services.
(2) The Consolidated Fund Services shall be provided for in the recurrent estimates, but
shall not be subject to Parliamentary debate nor to the expenditure limited by estimates nor
vote on account.
(3) Consolidated Fund Services shall be administered by the National Treasury.
(4) The National Treasury may arrange for another Accounting Officer to make payment
in the first place on its behalf against subsequent reimbursement from the appropriate Vote
of the Consolidated Fund Services.
Excess vote.
113. If an Accounting Officer finds, after Appropriation Accounts are completed, that he
or she has spent more than the total vote, that Accounting Officer shall seek Parliamentary
approval of the National Assembly through the Cabinet Secretary for that Excess Vote.
Payments to which an Accounting Officer objects.
114. (1) An Accounting Officer who is instructed by his or her Cabinet Secretary to make
payment which for any reasons the accounting officer has concerns, the Accounting Officer
shall raise those concerns in writing to the Cabinet Secretary.
(2) In the event that the Cabinet Secretary approves in writing for the processing of
the payment despite the concerns raised by the Accounting Officer under paragraph (1), the
Accounting Officer shall obey the instructions without further responsibility.
(3) Upon payment, the accounting officer may proceed as provided for under section 68(3)
of the Act, and may send a copy of the report to the Auditor-General.

-- 573 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 575
[Subsidiary]
Goods, works and services to be procured according to an approved procurement plan.
115. (1) All purchases of goods, works and services from suppliers, including capital
investments, shall comply with the provisions prescribed in the Public Procurement and Asset
Disposals Act (Cap. 412C) and the Regulations made thereunder and shall have the prior
approval of the Accounting Officer.
(2) Every year a procurement plan shall be prepared by Accounting Officers to form the
basis for procurement activities undertaken by government entities in the fiscal year.
(3) The procurement plan in paragraph (2) shall, where necessary, include estimated
costs of procurement, insurance, clearing, forwarding, warehousing and demurrage charges
for goods imported and have to undergo clearing and forwarding through ports of entry into
the country.
Recovery, disallowance and adjustment of payments.
116. (1) Amounts charged to Voted Funds, which are recovered in the financial year in
which payment was made, shall on or before the closing of books of that financial year, be
allocated to the budget item that was originally debited.
(2) Such amounts which are recovered after the closing of books of a financial year shall
be paid to the Consolidated Fund, provided that such amounts have not been allocated to a
clearing or suspense account during the financial year in which payment was made.
Re-Vote of Budget.
117. (1) Where an A.I.E holder observes that it will not be possible to utilize all the funds
allocated for a particular project in a given financial year, the AIE holder shall inform the
accounting officer not later than February.
(2) The Accounting Officer will then surrender the resources to the National Treasury and
the National Treasury shall ensure that the funds are re-voted for the project in the following
financial year in order to continue the implementation of the project.
Accountable documents.
118. (1) Accountable documents whether manual or electronic shall be under strict
control at all times and they shall include—
(a) indent forms (for supplies from government printer or government stores);
(b) local purchase order;
(c) local service order;
(d) authority to incur expenditure;
(e) cheques;
(f) receipt books; and
(g) imprest warrants.
(2) The Accounting officer shall keep his or her stock of accountable documents whether
manual under lock and key, issuing them in accordance with the daily needs of the service,
and keeping an accurate up-to-date record of their use by means of continuity control sheets.
(3) Where the accountable documents are in electronic form, the accounting officer shall
ensure appropriate mechanism are put in place for safeguarding and tracking them.

-- 574 of 625 --

576 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Preservation of accountable documents, books and records.
119. (1) Accounting Officers shall, subject to the provisions of the relevant national
legislation, retain certain documents, of whatever kind and such documents shall be preserved
in the following circumstances—
(a) where they may be of value to the national archives; or
(b) if they are the subject of unfinished audit enquiries; or
(c) if they are likely to be needed for pension purposes.
(2) After the expiry of the retention periods under paragraph (3) of this regulation, the
information may, if required, be secured in an alternative form that ensures the integrity and
reliability of the data and ensures that the information can be reproduced, where necessary.
(3) Subject to the overriding consideration under paragraph (1), certain class of documents
and records are to be preserved for a stipulated minimum period of time as detailed in the
Table below–
S/No Type of document Preservation period
1. Principal
ledger
10 years
2. Cash books 10 years
3. Journals 3 years
4. Payment vouchers 5 years
5. Paid cheques or electronic
payments
3 years
6. Completed indent warrants 12 months after the end of the
financial year to which they
relate.
7. Completed order forms 12 months after the end of the
financial year to which they
relate.
8. Duplicate receipts 12 months after the end of the
financial year to which they
relate.
9. Duplicate payment vouchers 12 months after the end of the
financial year to which they
relate.
10. Receipt books:
(a) Fully used
(b) Obsolete, partly used
6 months after date of completion
but must be inspected by the
Auditor General and the disposal
noted in the main counterfoils
receipts, book registers.
Expenditure in relation to human resources.
120. (1) Personnel management activities relating to the authorization of appointments,
the authorization of payments and the recording of those payments may not be performed
by the same officer.
(2) The budgetary allocation for personnel costs shall be determined on the basis of a
detailed costing of a human capital plan of a national government entity as approved by
the state department responsible for public service management matters, the Public Service
Commission and National Treasury.

-- 575 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 577
[Subsidiary]
(3) The Accounting Officer of a government entity shall ensure that the personnel cost
of all appointees, as well as promotion and salary increases, can be met within the budgetary
allocation voted for the national government entity.
(4) The responsible national government state department responsible for public service
management matter, the public service commission, shall only approve establishment of new
public service positions after getting confirmation of availability of budgetary provisions from
the National Treasury.
(5) For purposes of ensuring sustainable wage bill, where the Cabinet Secretary intends
to approve any changes under this regulation, he or she may consult the Salaries and
Remuneration Commission.
(6) No change relating to the above matters shall be introduced into the expenditure
estimates of the respective national government entity without the requisite authority.
Payroll certification by accounting officer.
121. (1) Personnel costs shall be classified based on the Government Finance Statistics
Manual and the standard chart of accounts used in capturing government expenditure.
(2) Each employee shall be linked to a program in the budget of a national government
entity's Vote.
(3) At least once every month, the accounting officer shall certify the correctness of the
payroll.
Deduction codes to be assigned to all payroll deductions.
122. (1) The National Treasury shall set requirements for issuing payroll deduction codes
for all discretionary and non-discretionary deductions.
(2) The Accounting Officer shall specify the purpose for which the code is applied for.
(3) The National Treasury may levy a fee on the discretionary deductions which shall be
paid by the receiving institution.
Remuneration of members of committees and commissions of inquiry.
123. (1) Remunerative benefits and other allowances for members and the staff of the
secretariat of special committees and commissions of enquiry shall be determined by, the
national government entity responsible for matters relating to public service management
in consultation with the Public Service Commission and the Cabinet Secretary taking into
account the recommendations by the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
(2) The remuneration of all members of a commission or committee shall be disclosed as
foot notes to the financial statements of the national government entity by the accounting
officer.
Services rendered by members during private time.
124. Where the chairperson requests a non-official member of a commission or committee
to render services in his or her private time, other than the normal preparations for meetings,
the person may be paid an allowance as determined by the relevant Accounting Officer.
Compensation and ex-gratia payment.
125. No offer of compensation in settlement of any claim against the Government or ex-
gratia payment may be made without a prior authority of the National Treasury, except where
powers are available to the Accounting Officer.

-- 576 of 625 --

578 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
BENEFITS AND ALLOWANCES OF PUBLIC OFFICERS
Authority for loans and advances.
126. (1) The accounting officer may only authorize salary advances for public officers
under him or her to be paid if there exists a budgetary provision in his or her Vote.
(2) No staff loan or advance which is properly chargeable to a head of expenditure shall
be debited to a salary advance expenditure item.
Benefits and allowances for Public Officers.
127. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may by way of a gazette establish a mechanism for public
officers to access loans including car loans, mortgage housing loans, motor cycle and bicycle
loans.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1), the Cabinet Secretary may issue guidelines
on benefits and allowances for public officers by way of a notice in Kenya Gazette.
LEASE FINANCING
Lease financing transactions by accounting officers of state and county departments.
128. (1) For the purpose of this regulation, a lease is regarded as a contract that gives the
lessee (the renter) the right to the use of property, plant or equipment for a fixed period of
time with a fixed schedule of payments to the lessor (the owner).
(2) The accounting officer of a state or county department may, for the purpose of
conducting the government entity's business, enter into operating lease transactions.
(3) The accounting officer of a state or county department may under no circumstances
enter into finance leases (non-operating lease) without the approval of the relevant National
Treasury.
(4) For the purpose of paragraph (3), a lease is considered to be a finance lease if—
(a) the lease transfers ownership of the asset to the government entity by the end of
the lease period;
(b) the government entity has the option to purchase the asset at a price which is
expected to be sufficiently lower than the fair value at the date the option becomes
exercisable, so that at the inception of the lease it is reasonably certain that the
option will be exercised;
(c) the lease term is for the economic life of the asset even if the title is not transferred;
(d) at the inception of the lease, the present value of the minimum lease payments
amount to at least 90% of the fair value of the leased asset;
(e) the leased asset is of a specialised nature such that only the government entity can
use the asset without major modifications being made;
(f) the lessor's losses associated with cancellation of the lease by the lessee is borne
by the lessee; and
(g) the leased asset cannot be easily replaced by another asset.
(5) The National Treasury shall monitor all finance lease transactions and report.

-- 577 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 579
[Subsidiary]
MANAGEMENT OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL TRANSFERS
Definitions of terms.
129. For purposes of Regulations 130, 131, 132, 133, 134 and 135—
(a) "national Accounting Officer" refers to an Accounting Officer of a national
government entity; and
(b) "county Accounting Officer" refers to an Accounting Officer of a county government
entity.
Duties of National Government Accounting Officers in managing intergovernmental transfers
to counties.
130. (1) A national government accounting officer transferring a conditional or
unconditional allocation to a county government in accordance with an Act of Parliament
shall be responsible for—
(a) ensuring that transfers to a county government—
(i) are made in accordance with the frameworks governing the conditional and
unconditional transfers to county governments;
(ii) are deposited only into the County Revenue Fund of a County Government;
and
(iii) are made in accordance with the relevant Act of Parliament unless
the allocations are withheld or stopped in terms of Article 225 of the
Constitution;
(b) ensuring that the transfer of funds is done only after information required in
terms of the laws and frameworks governing intergovernmental transfers has been
secured and all relevant information has been provided to the National Treasury.
(2) Upon approval of the County Allocation of Revenue Bill by Parliament, the Cabinet
Secretary shall communicate the frameworks under paragraph (1)(b), to county governments
within fifteen days after the approval.
(3) A national government accounting officer who transfers any conditional allocation to a
county government shall, in addition to any other requirement in terms of the Act or any other
applicable law or framework governing the allocation, monitor and evaluate the financial and
non-financial performance of programmes, fully or partially funded by the allocation and
submit to the National Treasury—
(a) a quarterly report within 30 days after the end of each quarter;
(b) an annual report within three months after the end of the financial year;
(c) the attendant conditions of any conditional grant to a county accounting officers.
(4) The reports referred to in paragraph (3) shall include information that—
(a) indicate the total amount of funds transferred to each county government;
(b) indicate the amount of funds withheld or stopped from any county government,
the reason for withholding or stopping and the action taken by the national
government Accounting Officer and the county government Accounting Officer to
deal with the matters that necessitated the withholding or the stoppage of the
transfer;
(c) indicate any reductions or additions of conditional or unconditional allocations to
county governments authorized by the National Treasury;

-- 578 of 625 --

580 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(d) indicate the funds, if any, spent by the national government Accounting Officer on
the administration of the transfer to the counties; and
(e) that may be required under the relevant law or framework governing the transfer
by the National Treasury.
Duties of County government Accounting Officers in managing intergovernmental transfers.
131. A county government Accounting Officer—
(a) shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with requirements of the relevant
law and frameworks governing the management of conditional and unconditional
transfers from the national government;
(b) shall ensure all transfers from the national government are included separately in
the County Government's Appropriation Bill;
(c) shall monitor and evaluate the financial and non-financial performance of
programmes funded by a conditional and unconditional transfer from the national
government and prepare and submit to the relevant national accounting officer—
(i) a quarterly report within 15 days after the end of each quarter in a format
prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board;
(ii) an annual report within two months after the end of each financial year in
a format prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board;
(d) the reports submitted in paragraph (1)(c) under this regulation shall specify—
(i) actual transfers received by the county government from the national
government;
(ii) actual expenditure incurred in respect of the transfer;
(iii) any reallocations authorised by the relevant national accounting officer;
(iv) to what extent the county government complied with the provisions of the
Act, these Regulations and met the conditions provided for in the relevant
framework of such a transfer;
(v) the steps taken to deal with non-compliance with any of the provisions of
the Act and these Regulations or the conditions provided for in the relevant
frameworks of such a transfer;
(vi) the extent to which the objectives and outputs of the transfer were achieved;
(vii) any other information as may be specified in the relevant framework for that
transfer and any other information accounting officer may determine.
Formats of annual reports on intergovernmental transfers.
132. The National Treasury may provide additional guidelines on how national
government Accounting Officers and County government Accounting Officers reports on
conditional transfers on a quarterly and annual basis, to facilitate the audit of transfers to
county governments.
Transfer made in error or fraudulently.
133. (1) Despite the provisions of any other law, where it is determined that the transfer
of funds to a county government was done in error or fraudulently such a transfer shall be
regarded as not legally due to that county government.
(2) An erroneous transfer contemplated in paragraph (1), may be recovered immediately
or set-off against future transfers to that county government, which would otherwise become
due to the county government.

-- 579 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 581
[Subsidiary]
Equitable transfer before approval of County Allocation of Revenue Bill.
134. (1) If the County Allocation of Revenue Bill submitted to Parliament for a financial
year has not been approved by Parliament or is not likely to be approved by Parliament, by
the beginning of the financial year, the Controller of Budget may authorize withdrawals of
up to fifty (50%) percent from the Consolidated Fund based on the last County Allocation of
Revenue Act approved by Parliament for the purposes of meeting expenditure of the county
governments for the financial year.
(2) The authority under paragraph (1) shall cease upon accent of the County Allocation
of Revenue Act for the financial year.
(3) The transfer to county governments made under paragraph (1) under this regulation
shall form part of their equitable transfer for the financial year.
Liability for costs incurred in violation of principles of cooperate governance and
intergovernmental relations.
135. (1) Any state organ involved in an intergovernmental dispute regarding any provision
of this Act or any division of revenue matter or allocation shall, before approaching a court
to resolve such dispute, make every effort to settle the dispute with the other state organ
concerned, including exhausting all alternative mechanisms provided for resolving disputes
in relevant legislation.
(2) If a court is satisfied that a state organ, in an attempt to resolve a dispute has not
exhausted all the mechanisms for alternative dispute resolutions as contemplated in section
35 of the Intergovernmental Relations Act, 2012, (No. 2/2012) and refers the dispute back for
the reason that the state organ has not complied with subsection (1), the expenditure incurred
by that state organ in approaching the court shall be regarded as wasteful expenditure.
(3) The costs in respect of such wasteful expenditure referred to in paragraph (2) shall,
in accordance with a prescribed procedure, be recovered without delay from the person who
caused the state organ not to comply with the requirements of paragraph (1).
PART XI – MONITORING AND REPORTING
Responsibility for monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
136. (1) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to planning shall prescribe
a framework for monitoring and reporting on non-financial performance for use by accounting
officers in evaluation of programmes and projects by measuring—
(a) financial indicators which shall capture expenditures on the implementation of
programmes and projects;
(b) outputs indicators which shall measure what is directly supplied through the
implementation of the programmes and projects; and
(c) outcome or results indicators of the programme or projects which capture the
expected effects on intended beneficiaries of the programme or project.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to planning, shall also set up
a system that shall facilitate efficient and effective data collection, storage and exchange
to monitor and report on non-financial -performance of the national government entity's
individual programmes and projects.
(3) An Accounting Officer shall put in place efficient and effective systems to monitor and
report on non-financial performance for his or her national government entity's individual
programmes and projects based on the prescribed format under paragraphs (1) and (2) and
submit a report to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for planning with a copy to the Auditor-
General.

-- 580 of 625 --

582 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(4) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for planning shall consolidate all the reports
received under paragraph (2), and submit a report to the Cabinet Secretary and publish and
publicize it within seven (7) days after submitting it to the Cabinet Secretary.
Footnotes to appropriation accounts.
137. (1) An Accounting Officer shall provide footnotes to the annual financial statements
prepared and submitted to the Auditor- General pursuant to section 81 of the Act
(2) The footnotes to the financial statements referred to under paragraph (1) of this
regulation, shall at the minimum include—
(a) the details of Appropriation-in-Aid;
(b) excess Appropriation-in-Aid, if any;
(c) reasons for material differences between approved estimates and actual
expenditure, or actual collection of Appropriation-in-Aid;
(d) losses and write-offs;
(e) nugatory and similar payments, compensation and ex-gratia payments;
(f) arrears of Appropriation-in-Aid and Appropriation-in-Aid abandoned; and
(g) advances appropriately analysed, including imprests.
(3) Where, in respect of any footnotes referred to, in this regulation, there is nil return
that particular footnote shall be omitted entirely.
Special public funds and state corporations additional reporting responsibilities.
138. An accounting officer of a national government entity shall disclose in the annual
financial and non-financial report a list of special funds or state corporations controlled by
national government entity.
PART XII – ASSET MANAGEMENT
Responsibility of an accounting officer of a national government entity on assets.
139. (1) The Accounting Officer of a national government entity shall take full
responsibility and ensure that proper control systems exist for assets and that—
(a) preventative mechanisms are in place to eliminate theft, security threats, losses,
wastage and misuse;
(b) movement and conditions of assets can be tracked; and
(c) stock levels are at an optimum and economical level.
(2) The Accounting Officer shall ensure that processes and procedures both electronic
and manual are in place for the effective, efficient, economical and transparent use of the
government entity's assets.
(3) The National Treasury shall provide guidelines on assets management.
Responsibility for national government entity inventory.
140. (1) Accounting Officer shall be responsible for the proper custody, care and use of
government inventories under their control, including imported goods in vessels awaiting
discharge and in customs warehouses awaiting clearance.
(2) Despite paragraph (1) under this regulation, an Accounting Officer shall be responsible
for the general management of government inventories held within that national government
entity.

-- 581 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 583
[Subsidiary]
(3) Accountability shall only be discharged when government inventories have been—
(a) consumed in the course of public business and records are available to show that
the government inventories have been consumed;
(b) worn out in the normal course of public business and removed from the stores
records and has been approved by accounting officer or they have been disposed of
in accordance with the Public Procurement and Asset Disposals Act (Cap. 412C); or
(c) lost, stolen, destroyed, damaged or rendered unserviceable other than by fair wear
and tear, and if removed from the store's record and has been approved in line with
section 69 of the Act.
(4) If accounting officer is satisfied that the retention of any government inventories is
no longer in the public interest, the accounting officer may authorize disposal in accordance
with the Public Procurement and Asset Disposals Act (Cap. 412C) and the Regulations made
thereunder.
(5) Removal from the store's record under paragraph (3) shall be reported to National
Treasury by the accounting officer.
(6) Where an Accounting Officer has reason to believe that any person—
(a) has received government inventory and has not duly handed it over;
(b) has received government inventory for which the person is accountable but has not
duly accounted for it; or
(c) has in hand government inventory which has not duly been applied to the purpose
for which they were collected,
the Accounting Officer shall serve a notice on the public officer requesting that within a
time specified in the notice, the person shall pay for, account for, or apply the inventory and
submit to the Accounting Officer satisfactory evidence that this has been done.
(7) The Accounting Officer of a government entity shall in consultation with a technical
department review, at least annually when finalising the budget, all fees, charges, rates, tariffs
or scales of fees or other charges relating to the letting of state property to ensure sound
financial planning and management.
Accounting officers’ responsibilities upon transfer of assets and liabilities.
141. (1) When assets or liabilities of a government entity are transferred to another
government entity or other institution in terms of legislation or following a reorganization
of government functions, the Accounting Officer for the transferring government entity shall
be required to—
(a) identify an inventory of such assets and liabilities; and
(b) provide the Accounting Officer for the receiving government entity or other
institution with necessary records, including human resource records of staff to be
transferred.
(2) Both the Accounting Officer for the transferring national government entity and the
Accounting Officer for the receiving national government entity or other institution shall sign
the inventory when the transfer takes place.
(3) The Accounting Officer for the transferring national government entity shall file a copy
of the signed inventory with the National Treasury and the Auditor-General within two weeks
of the transfer.

-- 582 of 625 --

584 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Assets accruing to the Government by Operation of Law.
142. Where any money, property or right accrues to the national government by operation
of law, the National Treasury, may exercise all powers, authority and prerogatives, and fulfill
any obligation on behalf of national governments.
Register of assets.
143. (1) The Accounting Officer shall be responsible for maintaining a register of assets
under his or her control or possession as prescribed by the relevant laws.
(2) The register of land and buildings shall record each parcel of land and each building
and the terms on which it is held, with reference to the conveyance, address, area, dates
of acquisition, disposal or major change in use, capital expenditure, lease hold terms,
maintenance contracts and other pertinent management details.
(3) All items of furniture and equipment issued for a government's quarters or offices,
large tools for government works, plant, equipment, vehicles or launches (large motor boats)
shall be recorded in a register.
(4) All acquisitions or assignment of immovable property shall be notified to the National
Treasury.
(5) All acquisitions or assignment of land with or without buildings shall be notified to
the National Treasury.
Purchase and the capacity of official vehicles for certain government officers.
144. (1) Official vehicles purchased for use by Cabinet Secretaries, Speakers of the
National Assembly and the Senate, Chief Justice, the Attorney-General, Secretary to the
Cabinet and the Head of Public Service, shall not exceed 2600 cc for saloon cars and 3000 cc
for 4 x 4 utility vehicles.
(2) Official vehicles purchased for use by Principal Secretaries, Accounting Officers, Judges
of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal, Director of Public Prosecution, Clerk of the
National Assembly and the Senate, Heads of Constitutional Commissions and Independent
Offices, commissioners of constitutional commissions, Inspector-General of Police shall not
exceed 2400 cc for saloon cars and 3000 cc for 4 x 4 utility vehicles.
(3) Official vehicles purchased for use by other officers on Job Group R and above and High
Court Judges and Chief Executive of state corporations shall not exceed 2000 cc for saloon
cars and 2900 cc for 4 x 4 utility vehicles.
(4) This section shall not apply in case of vehicles for official use by the President and
the Deputy President.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary may by way of notice in the gazette specify category of offices
and the category of vehicles to be used by those public officers.
(6) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this regulation commits an offence.
LOSSES AND WRITE OFFS
Definition.
145. For purposes of this Sub-Part, the term losses includes—
(a) actual loss or destruction of, or damage (other than fair wear and tear) to, or failure
to account for the disposal of public money, stamps, securities or property, movable
or immovable (including any money or other property not belonging to the national
government which is held or used by an officer in his official capacity either alone
or jointly with any other person); or

-- 583 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 585
[Subsidiary]
(b) non-collection of any moneys due or belonging to national government, or for
collection of which the national government is responsible; or
(c) payments made or liabilities incurred without or in excess of any statutory,
administrative or any other authority, including nugatory and similar payments
and payments arising from incorrect certificates, and irregular or excess issues of
stores, rations, etc.; or
(d) unauthorized use of national government stores, vehicles buildings, equipment
or any other property, or of service (e.g. repair workshops) provided for official
purposes; or
(e) compensation and similar payments (including third party claims in respect of
vehicle accidents) legal and court costs and any other additional expenditure or
liability which was avoidable and need not have been incurred.
Accounting officers responsibility for a national government entity.
146. When a loss as defined in this regulation is discovered, the Accounting Officer shall
investigate the circumstances of the loss—
(a) to ascertain the extent and amount of the loss; or
(b) to determine whether control or operational arrangements need to be improved in
order to prevent the occurrence of similar losses in the national government entity;
or
(c) to determine whether any offence or other fault of a public officer has been revealed
by the loss.
Revelation of offence.
147. Where investigations reveals that an offence has been committed, it shall be dealt
with in accordance with the relevant laws pertaining to criminal offences, as appropriate,
and the relevant disciplinary measures but the investigation of a loss shall not constitute a
disciplinary enquiry.
Procedure for handling losses.
148. (1) A loss may be revealed by defalcation or loss due to any cause, and thereafter
investigation proceedings shall be commenced immediately and a report made to the
Accounting Officer and where necessary to the police.
(2) The report referred to under paragraph (1), shall give details on the amount involved
and any other information available including a brief account of actions to prevent further
loss, and effect recovery.
(3) On receipt of the report, the accounting officer shall give instructions regarding
accounting entries, if any, to be made and any other action which appears to him or her to
be necessary.
(4) Where a liability has been established for a third party, payment shall be made,
provided that there is no reason to suspect that the third party had any responsibility for the
loss and the payment shall not await the results of the investigations of the loss.
(5) If the loss falls within the accounting officers powers under section 69(1) of the Act,
he or she shall authorize the write off of the loss up to an amount not exceeding hundred
thousand (KSh. 100,000) shillings in any one incidence and submit a report to the National
Treasury and the Auditor-General.
(6) If the loss falls within the Cabinet Secretary's powers under section 69 (2) of the Act, the
accounting officer shall seek the approval of the Cabinet Secretary to authorize him or her to

-- 584 of 625 --

586 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
write off the loss of an amount exceeding the one hundred thousand (KSh. 100,000) shillings
but not exceeding one percent of the national governments' entity's approved estimates
excluding the Consolidated Fund Services in any one incidence.
(7) The approval of the Cabinet Secretary shall be communicated to the accounting officer
in writing with a copy to the Auditor-General.
(8) Any loss exceeding the threshold for the Cabinet Secretary shall fall within the Cabinet
powers under section 69 (3) of the Act, the Accounting Officer shall—
(a) seek the approval of the Cabinet through the Cabinet Secretary to authorize him or
her to write off the loss exceeding one percent of the national government entity's
approved budget in any one incidence;
(b) the approval of the Cabinet shall be communicated to the Accounting Officer
through the Cabinet Secretary in writing with a copy to the Auditor General;
(c) the approval of the Cabinet shall be communicated to the Accounting Officer
through the Cabinet Secretary in writing with a copy to the Auditor General.
(9) The accounting officer shall also make a disclosure in the financial statements of that
national government entity.
Categories of losses.
149. (1) For the purposes of this regulation, cash deficiency is a loss arising from a
deficiency of cash or other negotiable instruments, whether it arises from a simple cash
shortage or from the use of fictitious entries or vouchers to conceal the existence of a
deficiency.
(2) Revenue losses may arise from—
(a) uncollectable revenue when debts due to national government cannot be collected
by reason that the debtor cannot be traced or is insolvent; and
(b) failure to assess or collect in circumstances which preclude subsequent assessment
or collection, and include any loss of interest caused by delay in making payments
into the appropriate public funds or from the making of irregular advances.
(3) Expenditure losses may arise from—
(a) irrecoverable overpayments, when an excess payment has been made by error and
recovery cannot be effected because the recipient cannot be traced or is otherwise
incapable of making repayment;
(b) nugatory payments, which arise in circumstances such as, the incurrence of a
penalty in which a national government entity has been legally obliged to make
payment, but for which no corresponding receipt of goods or services has been
derived;
(c) fraudulent payments which arise from transactions which involve a breach of the
Criminal Code (Cap. 75), by the use of falsified documents or certificates to steal
money or other property belonging to a Government and it is not recoverable.
(4) Inventory and equipment losses may arise from—
(a) deficiencies, including fraudulent issues of stores from stock and issues of stores
without proper evidence of use;
(b) damage or deterioration of goods in stock; or
(c) loss by accident in so far as they relate to equipment and inventories in use.

-- 585 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 587
[Subsidiary]
(5) Financial losses may arise from—
(a) irrecoverable advances and loans when moneys due to a national government
entity cannot be recovered by reason of a debtors default and include default on
National Government Guarantees;
(b) irregular advances and loans when money cannot be recovered because a national
government entity cannot establish a claim against any person or institution, as in
the case of expenditure wrongly charged to advances, or advances and loans made
without agreement for recovery;
(c) reduction of financial asset where the value of any financial asset has to be reduced
by reason of failure or capital restructuring of an enterprise; or
(d) losses on sale of securities where the losses are aggregated with gains over the
financial year, and any net loss is written off at the end of the year.
(6) Miscellaneous losses may arise from—
(a) loss of fixed fee receipts; or
(b) the loss of safe keys of any government safe or the compromise of any combination
lock; or
(c) the cost of altering locks and providing new keys or combinations; or
(d) the value of any missing items from the safe; or
(e) irrecoverable claims dealt with as laid down in these Regulations.
Investigation of every case of loss.
150. (1) The accounting officer of a national government entity shall cause an
investigation to be conducted into every reported case of loss, and where the accounting
officer of that entity is implicated in the loss, the Cabinet Secretary shall be the appropriate
authority to cause investigation to be conducted.
(2) In the case where the investigation on report implicates the accounting officer, Cabinet
Secretary shall revoke the designation and also report the matter to the relevant authority.
Defective systems.
151. If the report of the investigating authority indicates that systems currently in
operation, including those for the training of staff are defective, the accounting officer of the
national government entity shall consult with the National Treasury to consider measures for
rectification.
Financial liability of officers.
152. (1) Recovery of the value of a loss, whether by recovery proceedings under these
Regulations, shall constitute a settlement of a civil claim against the officer arising from the
loss.
(2) Recovery of a loss shall not be a substitute for criminal prosecution or disciplinary
proceedings.
Annual statement of losses.
153. The Accounting officer shall maintain a register of all losses incurred by his or her
national government entity and attach a list of all losses incurred during that year to the
financial statements submitted to the Auditor-General for audit with a copy to the National
Treasury.

-- 586 of 625 --

588 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Clarifications on classification of losses.
154. Where any doubt arises on the correct classification of a loss or the accounting
procedure required the directions of the National Treasury shall be sought.
Claims on damaged or incomplete goods.
155. Where goods are received damaged or incomplete and such goods are subject to a
claim on suppliers, insurers or carriers, they shall not constitute a loss until the claims prove
irrecoverable.
Investigation of losses.
156. (1) The fact that losses arise from un-collectable revenue, irrecoverable
overpayments, or irrecoverable claims at the time of disposal does not preclude the prior
investigation of circumstances of the losses.
(2) Applications for write off shall be accompanied by an investigation report indicating
whether remedial accounting or other action is necessary.
Writing off of losses.
157. (1) An Accounting Officer may only write off losses if he or of she is satisfied that—
(a) all reasonable steps have been taken to recover the losses and the loss is
irrecoverable; or
(b) he or she is convinced that—
(i) recovery of the loss would be uneconomical;
(ii) it would be to the advantage of the state to effect a settlement of its claim
or to waive the claim.
(2) An Accounting Officer shall ensure that all losses written off are done in accordance
with this Act, these regulations or any other relevant legislation.
Interest payable on recoverable losses.
158. Interest may be charged on recoverable losses at the Central Bank Rate.
Right of the Auditor-General.
159. The authorization of disposal of a case of loss does not prejudice the right of the
Auditor- General to carry out further investigation.
PART XIII – INTERNAL AUDIT AND AUDIT COMMITTEES
Mandate of internal auditors.
160. Internal auditors shall—
(a) review and evaluate budgetary performance, financial management, transparency
and accountability mechanisms and processes in national government entities,
including Parliament and Judiciary;
(b) have a duty to give reasonable assurance through the audit committee on the state
of risk management, control and governance within the organization; and
(c) review the effectiveness of the financial and non-financial performance
management systems of the entities.
Compliance with professional standards and code of ethics.
161. Internal auditors shall comply with the International Professional Practices
Framework as issued by the Institute of Internal Auditors from time to time and shall conduct

-- 587 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 589
[Subsidiary]
audits in accordance with policies and guidelines issued by the Public Sector Accounting
Standards Board to ensure uniformity and consistency across national government.
Independence of the internal auditor.
162. (1) The Head of Internal Audit unit under a national government entity shall enjoy
operational independence through the reporting structure by reporting administratively to
the Accounting Officer and functionally to the Audit Committee.
(2) An Accounting Officer shall ensure that the organizational structure of the internal
audit unit facilitates—
(a) the entity to accomplish its internal audit responsibilities;
(b) the internal auditor with sufficient authority to promote independence and to
ensure broad audit coverage, adequate consideration of internal audit reports;
(c) appropriate action to be taken on internal audit recommendations; and
(d) the internal auditor to be independent of the programs, operations and activities
he or she audits to ensure the impartiality and credibility of the internal audit work
undertaken.
(3) The internal auditor shall have unrestricted, direct and prompt access to all records,
officials or personnel holding any contractual status and to all the premises and properties
of the entity.
(4) The internal auditor shall respect the confidential nature of information and shall use
such information with discretion and only in so far as it is relevant to reach an internal audit
opinion.
(5) All internal audit activities shall remain free of influence by any element in the
organization, including matters of audit selection, scope, procedures, frequency, timing,
or report content to permit maintenance of an independent and objective mental attitude
necessary in rendering reports.
(6) Internal auditors shall have no direct operational responsibility or authority over any
of the activities they review, and accordingly, they shall not develop nor install systems or
procedures, prepare records, or engage in any other activity which would normally be audited.
THE INTERNAL AUDITOR-GENERAL DEPARTMENT OF THE NATIONAL TREASURY
Independence of Internal Auditor-General.
163. The office of the Internal Auditor-General shall be an office in the National Treasury.
Functions of Internal Auditor-General Department.
164. The Internal Auditor-General, in leading the internal audit function within the
National Treasury, is responsible for policy formulation and strategic direction of internal
audit function within the national government entities including—
(a) advising the Cabinet Secretary and the Principal Secretary on emerging issues in
internal auditing;
(b) developing and implementing the use of innovative approaches in performing
independent assessment of systems, controls and efficiencies guided by
professional standards;
(c) supporting the entities efforts to achieve their objectives;
(d) promoting national government-wide risk management and provide the
management with consulting services to improve the overall national government
operations;

-- 588 of 625 --

590 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(e) providing capacity building for both levels of governments including developing
curriculum, training materials and undertake training for audit committees; and
(f) reporting annually to the National Treasury on the internal audit function
performance.
The role of Accounting Officer in risk management.
165. The Accounting Officer shall ensure that the national government entity develops—
(a) risk management strategies, which include fraud prevention mechanism; and
(b) a system of risk management and internal control that builds robust business
operations.
Performance appraisal.
166. (1) Each year the internal audit unit of a national government entity shall assess
its own effectiveness through an internal performance appraisal and shall carry out annual
review of the performance of the internal audit activity commenting on its effectiveness in
the annual report to National Treasury.
(2) Each year the Audit Committee shall carry out annual review of the independence,
performance and competency of the internal audit unit and comment on their effectiveness
in the annual report.
(3) At least once every three years but not more than five years, internal audit unit
shall undergo a professional assessment of its effectiveness undertaken by a professionally
recognized body or institution.
Reporting material breaches and persistent material breaches.
167. When indications of fraud, material breaches and wasteful expenditure have been
identified in a State Organ, or any other national government entity in sections 92 of the Act,
the head of the internal audit unit shall immediately notify the Cabinet Secretary.
Prohibition from conducting assurance services.
168. An internal auditor shall not perform audit assignments for providing assurance
relating to activities and structures on which he or she has provided consulting services or in
which he had been employed over in the last twenty four months.
Disciplinary liability on internal auditors.
169. Heads of internal audit units and the internal auditors shall bear legal and
disciplinary liability for failure to discharge their responsibilities under the Act and these
Regulations:
Provided that assurance procedures alone even when performed with due professional care
shall not be a guarantee that all significant risk shall be identified.
INTERNAL AUDIT PLANNING, PERFORMANCE AND REPORTING
Risk based audit assessment strategic plan.
170. (1) Internal audit planning shall be carried out on the basis of risk assessment and
shall be set out in a three-year strategic plan, on the basis of which an annual internal audit
unit plan shall be developed.
(2) The annual work plan developed in paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be—
(a) submitted to the audit committee by the 15th February each financial year; and
(b) approved by the audit committee and shared with the Accounting Officer of that
entity, in sufficient time for inclusion in the budget of that entity.

-- 589 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 591
[Subsidiary]
Communicating results.
171. (1) The findings and recommendations arising from each internal audit assignment
shall be promptly reported to the accounting officers.
(2) The final report, including the actions taken by the accounting officer shall be reported
to the audit committee in the format determined by the Cabinet Secretary.
(3) When updating the management of the progress of an audit assignment, the internal
auditor shall—
(a) give an oral preliminary report which shall be confirmed in writing within seven
(7) days;
(b) discuss the findings, conclusions and recommendations with the auditee;
(c) issue a signed written report after each internal audit assignment that is objective,
clear, concise, constructive and timely;
(d) give reports which clearly present the purpose, scope and results of the audit; and
(e) give reports with recommendations for potential improvement, suggestions of
corrective actions and acknowledgement of satisfactory performance.
IMPLEMENTATION OF AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS
Enforcement of internal audit recommendations.
172. (1) The accounting officer of the concerned entity shall be responsible for the
implementation of the recommendations made in the audit reports and shall develop
response and action plan which he or she shall submit to the Chairperson of the audit
committee within fourteen days.
(2) The response and action plan submitted to chairperson of the audit in paragraph (1)
of this regulation shall be submitted to the Audit Committee for follow up to ensure their
implementation.
Preparation and submission of quarterly and annual audit reports.
173. (1) Each head of internal audit shall prepare a quarterly internal audit report which
shall cover areas provided for in guidelines and shall be in the format issued by the Cabinet
Secretary.
(2) The quarterly report in paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be submitted within 14
days of the end of the quarter to the accounting officer of the concerned entity, the Audit
Committee and the National Treasury.
(3) At the end of each financial year, the Internal Auditor- General shall prepare for the
national government clear and comprehensible annual report that consolidates the quarterly
audit assurance reports prepared by all internal audit units in national government entities,
in accordance with formats prescribed by the Accounting Standards Board.
AUDIT COMMITTEES
Establishment of audit committees.
174. (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this regulation, each national government entity shall
have an audit committee.
(2) The National Treasury, where deemed necessary, may approve the sharing of one audit
committee by two or more entities.

-- 590 of 625 --

592 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) In the case of a shared audit committees referred to in paragraph (2), the appointing
authorities of the concerned entities shall jointly appoint the chairperson and members of
the joint audit committee in consultation with the National Treasury.
(4) There shall be a minimum of three members, excluding a person who shall be
appointed to represent the National Treasury in each audit committee and a maximum of five
of whom at least two shall be from recognized professional bodies.
(5) The chairperson of an audit committee shall be independent of the national
government entities, be knowledgeable of the organization, have the requisite business and
leadership skills and shall not be a political office holder.
(6) In addition to paragraph (5), majority of members appointed to the audit committee
shall not be past or present employees of the entity, and shall not have served as an employee
or agent of a business organisation which has carried out any business with the concerned
entity in the last two years.
(7) All members of an audit committee shall—
(a) be holders of at least a first degree from a recognized university in Kenya;
(b) have a good understanding of government operation, financial reporting or
auditing; and
(c) have a good understanding of the objects, principles and functions of the entity to
which they are to be appointed.
(8) Each Accounting Officer of an entity shall ensure that the audit committee is
adequately funded and supported.
(9) The chairperson of an audit committee shall not serve concurrently as a member of
any other audit committee of the concerned national government entity, but its members can
serve in up to a maximum of three audit committees at the same time.
(10) Deleted by L.N. 229/2015, r. 8(d).
[L.N. 229/2015, r. 8.]
Duties of the audit committees.
175. The main function of the audit committee shall be to—
(a) support the Accounting Officers with regard to their responsibilities for issues
of risk, control and governance and associated assurance but the responsibility
over the management of risk, control and governance processes remains with the
management of the concerned entity; and
(b) follow up on the implementation of the recommendations of internal and external
auditors.
Composition of audit committees.
176. (1) The Accounting Officer of a national or county government entity shall not be
a member of the audit committee, but shall attend a meeting of the audit committee by the
invitation of the chairperson of the committee.
(2) Audit Committee members shall be persons of integrity and meet the requirements
of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
Terms of appointment.
177. (1) Members of audit committees shall be appointed, for a term of three years and
shall be eligible for re-appointment for a further term of three years.

-- 591 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 593
[Subsidiary]
(2) Despite the provision of paragraph (1), after expiry of every term at least one third of
the committee shall retire and not be eligible for re-appointment.
(3) The roles and responsibilities of the audit committee shall be laid out in the guidelines
issued by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board.
Vacancy of office.
178. (1) A person shall cease to be a member of an audit committee if—
(a) that person is convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not less than six months; or
(b) that person is absent from two consecutive regular meetings of the committee
without leave of absence; or
(c) that person resigns, in writing, from the audit committee; or
(d) that persons' term of office expires; or
(e) that person ceases to be a member by virtue of withdrawal of his or her nomination
to the audit committee by the nominating institution; or
(f) that person becomes an employee or officer of the concerned entity; or
(g) that person is discovered to have a conflict of interest as described in at the time
of his appointment and failed to disclose it; or
(h) the audit committee is disbanded.
(2) The National Treasury shall be informed of any contemplated termination of the
services of a person serving on an audit committee for its concurrence.
FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
Meetings of the audit committee.
179. (1) The audit committee shall meet at least once in every three months.
(2) Each member of the audit committee shall have one vote.
(3) The audit committee shall make decisions by resolution.
(4) In the event of a tie vote, the chair shall be entitled to cast a second vote.
(5) A majority of the members of the audit committee that includes at least fifty (50%)
percent plus one member shall constitute a quorum for the meetings of the committee.
(6) The chair of the audit committee shall—
(a) ensure that minutes are taken at each meeting and provided to the members of the
committee before the next meeting;
(b) have access to management, the head of internal audit and external auditors; and
(c) send or cause to be sent—
(i) all notices of audit committee meetings at least fourteen days before the
meeting; and
(ii) all minutes of audit committee meetings.
(7) If at any meeting of the audit committee the chair is not present, the members shall
elect a chair for purposes of conducting that meeting.

-- 592 of 625 --

594 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Code of conduct.
180. Any code of conduct of public officers shall also apply to members of the audit
committee in relations to their functions, powers and duties as members of the committee.
Remuneration and compensation.
181. (1) Members of the audit committee shall be paid an allowance on account of
attendance of audit committee meetings as determined by National Treasury in consultation
with the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
(2) A national government entity shall reimburse members of its audit committee for
expenses incurred while attending to audit committee duties.
[L.N. 229/2015, r. 10.]
Capacity building for Audit Committees.
182. The accounting officer shall—
(a) provide capacity building to all public national government entity audit
committees;
(b) provide policies and guidelines on audit committees;
(c) monitor the effectiveness of audit committees; and
(d) provide periodic updates of Audit committee activities through the website.
PART XIV – PUBLIC DEBT MANAGEMENT
Guiding Principles for national government borrowing.
183. National government borrowing shall be guided by the following principles—
(a) need to ensure stability of domestic financial markets;
(b) promotion of inter-generational equity in the sharing of burdens and benefits of
public borrowing;
(c) determination of thresholds of borrowing rights for both levels of government;
(d) use of objective criteria for evaluating national government entities or county
government eligibility for national government debt guarantee; and
(e) prudence and equity in setting limits for debt stock levels for each county
government.
Policy frameworks in public debt management.
184. The policy framework in the management of public debt shall comprise of the
medium term debt management strategy.
Medium term debt management strategy.
185. (1) Any borrowing by the national government shall be informed by the medium
term debt management strategy, which shall be reviewed annually, prepared and executed by
the Public Debt Management Office in accordance with the delegated authority by the Cabinet
Secretary.
(2) Medium term debt management strategy shall be formulated annually on a three year
rolling basis.
(3) The Strategy shall be approved by the Cabinet.

-- 593 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 595
[Subsidiary]
(4) The medium term debt management strategy shall be prepared taking into account—
(a) the borrowing needs of the Republic of Kenya;
(b) prevailing macro-economic conditions;
(c) prevailing conditions of the financial markets; and
(d) any other relevant factors.
(5) The public debt management strategy shall entail minimising borrowing costs with a
prudent degree of risks.
Annual national government borrowing programme.
186. (1) The medium term debt management strategy shall be implemented through the
annual borrowing programme for each fiscal year.
(2) The annual borrowing programme shall include issuance of government securities and
disbursement of external loans for the fiscal year and show indicative dates of such issuance
and disbursements.
Borrowing powers of the government.
187. (1) The Cabinet Secretary shall derive powers to raise loans for the Government of
Kenya from section 49 of the Act.
(2) The national government may from time to time borrow within and outside Kenya such
sums of money in such amount and on such terms and conditions as to interest, repayment,
disbursement or otherwise as the Cabinet Secretary may think fit, in any of the following
manners—
(a) by issuing external government securities; or
(b) by issuing Treasury Bills or Treasury Bond or stock; or
(c) by advances from Central Bank of Kenya under the Central Bank of Kenya Act (Cap.
491); or
(d) by bank overdraft on Exchequer Account or any other public account; or by any
other loan or credit evidenced by instruments in writing.
Use of moneys borrowed and credits obtained.
188. All sums borrowed under the Act shall be expended only on the activities included
in the approved estimates of expenditure of the national government entities.
Formalisation of agreements for loans.
189. Negotiation with foreign governments and agencies for external loans shall
culminate into and shall be formalised into one of the following recognised instruments—
(a) loan agreements;
(b) exchange of letters that constitute an agreement;
(c) subscription agreements in regard to external government securities; and
(d) national government guarantee.

-- 594 of 625 --

596 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Credit purchases.
190. Where development partner have opted to give loans through credit purchase or
commodity loan arrangements, for the purposes of budgeting and accounting the following
procedures shall be followed—
(a) the amount of expenditure and matching direct payment as agreed and as
applicable, shall be included in the development estimates under separate items;
(b) accounting officer shall apply through the National Treasury for utilisation of the
credit purchase facility in the prescribed manner as set-out in the loan instrument;
(c) after supplying goods or services, the development partner shall notify National
Treasury of the amount disbursed against the loan;
(d) the National Treasury shall record the amounts disbursed as a drawing against each
loan facility;
(e) the National Treasury shall forward invoices and debit advices to the accounting
officer concerned to bring the expenditure involved into account; and
(f) the accounting officer shall, on satisfying herself or himself of receipt of goods and
services, record the transactions in the stores ledger card and the accounting officer
shall notify the National Treasury on the receipt of goods and services.
Modes of payment (disbursement) loan funds.
191. The procedure to be followed in the disbursement of loan funds shall be defined in
the respective agreement and shall generally assume one or more of the following methods—
(a) credit purchase; or
(b) direct disbursement to the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund established
by an Act of Parliament for a specific purpose; or
(c) reimbursement, where the government pays for goods and services supplied and
later on claim reimbursement from the financier.
Borrowing purposes.
192. The national government may borrow in pursuant to the requirements of section 49
of the Act for the purpose of—
(a) financing national government budget deficits;
(b) borrowing for purposes of cash management;
(c) honouring obligations under outstanding national government guarantees;
(d) refinancing outstanding debt or repaying a loan prior to its date of repayment;
(e) mitigation against adverse effects caused by an urgent and unforeseen event in
cases where the contingency fund has been depleted;
(f) mitigation against significant balance of payment imbalances; and
(g) meeting any other development policy objectives that the Cabinet Secretary shall
deem necessary, consistent with the law, and as Parliament may approve.
Objectives of public debt management.
193. The objectives of public debt management are to ensure that the government's
financing needs and its payment obligations are met at the lowest possible cost over the
medium to long term, with a prudent degree of risk, and to promote development of the

-- 595 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 597
[Subsidiary]
domestic debt market while ensuring the equitable sharing of benefits and burdens of public
debt between the current and future generation.
PUBLIC DEBT MANAGEMENT OFFICE
Functions of public debt management office.
194. In addition to the provisions of section 63 of the Act, the functions of the Public Debt
Management Office established under section 62 shall be to—
(a) prepare and update an annual medium-term debt management strategy including
debt sustainability analysis in accordance with regulations;
(b) prepare and review an annual borrowing programme as appropriate including the
auction calendar to facilitate auction of government debt securities;
(c) participate in negotiation meetings with government creditors, and provide
technical support to the Cabinet Secretary on public debt operations;
(d) assess the risks in issuing any guarantees including contingent liabilities inherent
in public private partnership projects, and prepare reports on the method used for
assessment and the results thereof for the attention of the Cabinet Secretary;
(e) facilitate the recovery of any payments including interest and other costs incurred
by Government due to the honouring of outstanding guarantees;
(f) prepare annual debt management report which shall include outstanding
guarantees, outstanding lending and government on-lending by Government;
(g) monitor and keep track of debt levels;
(h) to keep timely, comprehensive and accurate records of outstanding Government
debt, guarantees and lending in an appropriate database;
(i) advise on all debt servicing obligations of Government;
(j) prepare and publish debt statistical bulletins regularly;
(k) prepare forecasts on Government debt servicing and disbursements as part of the
yearly budget preparation;
(l) compile, verify and report on all Government debt arrears and design a strategy for
the settlement of those arrears;
(m) monitor that the disbursements of loans raised by Government are in accordance
with agreed disbursement schedules;
(n) formulate External Resources Policy;
(o) assess, mobilize, negotiate and allocate all external resources including the
consolidation of the donor commitment register in the annual national budget;
(p) examine and scrutinise proposals for financing projects of a national government
entity from an accounting officer;
(q) formulate and harmonize policies and coordinate matters relating to employment
of Kenyan nationals and appointment of expatriate consultants and technical
assistance as experts and consultants in projects supported by development
partners;
(r) ensure adherence to the accepted guidelines and procedures for procurement
involving funds provided under foreign aid;

-- 596 of 625 --

598 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(s) coordinate, review and monitor the utilization of external resources including joint
programming, joint work plans, joint visits, joint implementation, and monitoring
and evaluation;
(t) profile external resources and maintain the accounts thereof;
(u) formulate an external resource, mobilization strategy to guide the national and
county governments in external resource mobilization including monitoring;
(v) liaise for external economic relations with international development agencies;
(w) coordinate all international agreements involving financial economic and
technical co-operation dealing predominantly with economic and financial issues;
(x) programme and manage financing of fellowships, scholarships and foreign training
offers from bilateral and multilateral sources;
(y) ensure harmonization, alignment and coordination of external resources in line
with international conventions of which Kenya is a member state thereof;
(z) monitor disbursement and absorption of external resources including reporting of
the same by both national and county governments;
(aa) formulate guidelines and procedures for reporting and recording budget estimates
and expenditure for external resource;
(bb) provide guidance and capacity development to county governments in the
assessment, mobilization, negotiation and allocation of all multilateral and
bilateral external resources for implementation of development partners;
(cc) support aid effectiveness initiatives and to use country systems in the management
of external resources and where there is need, support in strengthening them
rather than avoiding them;
(dd) ensure linkages of the National Treasury with NGOs and coordination of NGOs
through the formation of a National Consultative Forum; and
(ee) perform such other functions as may be determined by the Cabinet Secretary.
Redemption, conversion and consolidation of loans.
195. The Cabinet Secretary may, on such terms and conditions as he or she may determine,
and, when necessary, with the concurrence of the lender—
(a) repay any loan prior to the redemption date of that loan; or
(b) convert the loan into any other loan; or
(c) consolidate two or more loans into an existing or new loan.
Setting debt limit.
196. (1) Pursuant to section 50(2) of the Act, the debt limit at any given time shall not
exceed the set limits determined in accordance with fiscal responsibility principles under
regulation 26(1)(c) of these Regulations.
(2) In addition to the debt limit under paragraph (1), the annual thresholds for the annual
borrowing by the national and county governments and their entities as required by section
50(5) of the Act shall be set by Parliament.
(3) The debt limit under paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be specified annually in the
budget policy statement and the medium term debt management strategy paper.
(4) The annual new government debt and guarantees shall be consistent with the debt
limits set out under paragraph (1) of this regulation.

-- 597 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 599
[Subsidiary]
(5) For the purposes of monitoring compliance with the limits under paragraph (1),
the amount of government debt and government guarantees which are not denominated in
shillings shall be recalculated at the prevailing exchange rate of the Central Bank of Kenya.
[L.N. 155/2019, r. 2.]
Criteria for issuance of government securities.
197. (1) The issuance of government securities to raise debt capital shall be by way of
auction or such other method as Cabinet Secretary may determine.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) of this regulation, the auction of domestic
government securities shall take into account the following factors—
(a) pricing of the domestic government securities;
(b) refinancing risk of the domestic governance securities;
(c) the market stability when taking up domestic government securities; and
(d) the borrowing programme which is consistent with the medium term debt strategy
and budget policy statement.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary may establish an auction committee responsible for the
issuance of government securities for the purpose of financing the budget deficit comprised
of—
(a) Head of Public Debt Management Office;
(b) the Governor, Central Bank of Kenya or his or her nominee;
(c) Head of the accounting policy within the National Treasury; and
(d) Head of Economic Affairs.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall appoint a chairperson among the members mentioned
under paragraph (3) in this regulation.
(5) The Public Debt Management Office shall provide the secretariat to the Committee.
(6) Where national government securities are to be issued other than by auction, their
terms and conditions shall be subject to the prior approval of the Cabinet Secretary.
(7) The Committee may co-opt the relevant County Executive Committee Member or his
or her representative on need basis.
Issuance of government securities outside Kenya.
198. (1) The issuance of government securities outside Kenya shall be in such mode as
the Cabinet Secretary shall approve in accordance with the Act.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) in this regulation, the issuance of external
government securities shall take into account the following factors—
(a) pricing of the foreign government securities;
(b) refinancing risk of the foreign governance securities;
(c) the impact on exchange rate stability when taking up foreign government
securities; and
(d) the borrowing programme which is consistent with the medium term debt strategy
and budget policy statement.

-- 598 of 625 --

600 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Reporting on public debt by counties and national government entities.
199. (1) National government entities and each County Treasury shall submit to the
National Treasury a report on public debt in a format prescribed by the Accounting Standards
Board within two months after the end of the financial year.
(2) The report to be submitted under paragraph (1), shall include at the minimum the
following information—
(a) review of previous year's financing of budget deficit;
(b) composition of domestic debt;
(c) composition of external debt;
(d) on-lent loans and contingent liabilities;
(e) debt strategy and debt sustainability;
(f) outlook for the medium term; and
(g) any commitment fees and penalties paid on any undisbursed amounts of a loan.
Annual debt reporting.
200. (1) Not later than three months after the end of each financial year, the Cabinet
Secretary shall prepare and submit an annual report to Parliament on public debt in the format
set by the Cabinet Secretary.
(2) The annual public debt report under paragraph (1) shall include the following
information—
(a) Review of previous year's financing of budget deficit;
(b) composition of External debt;
(c) publicly guaranteed debt;
(d) on-lent loans and contingent liabilities;
(e) debt strategy and debt sustainability;
(f) outlook for the medium term; and
(g) any commitment fees and penalties paid on any undisbursed amounts of a loan.
Government guaranteed debt.
201. (1) All financial obligations for which the National Treasury has issued guarantees
on behalf of and for the account of the government in full compliance with the Act shall be
government guaranteed debt.
(2) The Cabinet Secretary shall participate in the negotiations on the contracting of a
guaranteed loan by advising the borrower on the best financial terms available, and shall sign
on behalf of the national government agreements on the issuance of a government guarantees
or guarantee letters.
(3) Any proposals for amendments to the loan agreement for which a guarantee is already
issued shall be done with prior approval of the Cabinet Secretary.
(4) Borrowers under government guaranteed loans shall provide to the Cabinet Secretary,
on a quarterly basis, information on the disbursements and repayments of funds under the
loan.

-- 599 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 601
[Subsidiary]
(5) Where necessary, the Cabinet Secretary may request additional information on
National Government guaranteed loans from the national government entities and county
governments.
(6) The terms and conditions for national government entities applying for government
guaranteed financing and the government guarantee issuance procedures shall be determined
by the Cabinet Secretary with the approval of Parliament.
(7) Call under a national government entity guarantee or county governments guarantee
shall be due only in the event—
(a) a borrower has not effected a full or partial payment on a loan in accordance with
the loan agreement terms and conditions; and
(b) a creditor has notified the Cabinet Secretary after taking steps and actions provided
for in the loan agreement for collection of the amounts due from the borrower
within a period of one month from the date of default.
(8) The Cabinet Secretary shall require the borrower to explain the circumstances
surrounding the default and the measures being taken to correct the situation within fifteen
after notification by the creditor.
(9) Where the requirements under paragraph 7(b) have not been provided for in the
government guarantee issuance agreement, the Cabinet Secretary shall determine together
with the creditor the actions to be taken where a payment on a national government guarantee
is due, as well as the time limits within which the national government should pay the overdue
amount.
(10) The national government shall, from the date of the payment under a national
government guarantee, enter into the creditor's rights under the loan agreement to the
amount of then payment made.
(11) The Cabinet Secretary shall take necessary actions provided for under sections 61
and 94 of the Act.

-- 600 of 625 --

602 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Eligibility and evaluation criteria for national government guarantees.
202. Pursuant to the provisions of section 58 of the Act, the capital project expenditures
of—
(a) county governments for which a guarantee is requested, shall meet the following
requirements—
(i) the borrower shall demonstrate that the project could not be financed on
reasonable terms and conditions without a government loan;
(ii) provide the projected cash flow clearly setting out projected disbursement
schedule and repayment plan;
(iii) the borrower shall contribute a substantial portion of project funds from
their own resources and in any case not less than fifteen (15) percent;
(iv) a national government entity or county government that defaults on a loan
shall be put on an agreed financial recovery programme by the National
Treasury;
(v) it is a feasible project that has been approved by the national government
entity or county government entity as may be required by national or county
legislation;
(vi) the application of the guarantee shall be submitted with a draft loan
agreement; and
(vii) any other guidelines consistent with the Act as may be gazetted by the
Cabinet Secretary;
(b) national governments entities for which a guarantee is requested, shall meet the
following requirements—
(i) the national government entity shall demonstrate that the project could not
be financed on reasonable terms and conditions without a loan;
(ii) provide the projected cash flow clearly setting out a projected disbursement
schedule and repayment plan;
(iii) the national government entity shall contribute at least fifteen (15) percent
of the project cost from their own resources;
(iv) it is a feasible project that has been approved by the governing body as
required under these Regulations;
(v) concessionality of the proposed loan is fully evaluated by the national
government and is determined to be at the acceptable level of grant element
as per the borrowing strategy;
(vi) satifies all the fiscal responsibility principles set out in the Act and these
Regulations;
(vii) the National Treasury has confirmed that the lender is of good credibility
and standing with the Government of Kenya; and
(viii) any other guidelines as Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury may
prescribe in a government gazette.
Process for approving a guarantee for a national government entity.
203. Pursuant to the provisions of section 58(2)(a) of the Act, and in addition to
provisions under regulation 202, the following procedures shall apply in relation to a national
government entity—
(a) before seeking a national government guarantee, the entity governing body of the
national government entity shall approve the borrowing including its terms and
conditions;

-- 601 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 603
[Subsidiary]
(b) after approval by the governing body, the Chief Executive Officer of the entity shall
submit the proposed loan agreement and a sessional paper to the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for the national government entity for approval of the borrowing,
including its broad terms and conditions;
(c) upon approval under paragraph (b), the Chief Executive Officer shall submit the
final, draft loan financing agreement and the approval of the governing body and
the Cabinet Secretary responsible for the entity to the Cabinet Secretary requesting
for the guarantee of the final loan financing agreement;
(d) the Cabinet Secretary may reject a request for loan guarantee with reasons and
communicate the same to the concerned chief executive officer;
(e) upon approval of a loan guarantee request, the Cabinet Secretary shall seek the
legal opinion of the Attorney General.
(f) upon receiving the views of the Attorney-General and taking them into account,
the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury shall submit a sessional paper to
Parliament with recommendations seeking its approval.
(g) the Cabinet Secretary shall communicate the decision of Parliament on the draft
loan guarantee to the respective chief executive officer; and
(h) upon approval by Parliament the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury shall
issue a loan guarantee.
Approval of draft loan guarantee by Parliament.
204. Upon recommendation by the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury, Parliament
may approve a draft loan guarantee document as provided under section 58(2)(f) of the Act,
only if it is satisfied that—
(a) the guarantee is in the public interest;
(b) the borrowers financial position is strong enough to enable the borrower to repay
the loan proposed to be guaranteed and to pay interest and other charges based on
projected revenue streams;
(c) concessionality of the proposed loan is fully evaluated by the national and county
governments and is determined to be at the acceptable level of grant element as
per the borrowing strategy;
(d) the loan investments are geared towards stimulating economic growth in a county
government; and
(e) all legal issues relating to financial agreements tripartite signing, and subsidiary
agreements are fully addressed.
Roles and responsibilities of accounting officers in debt management operations and loan
administration.
205. For the purposes of debt management operations and loan administration, the
accounting officers of a national government entity shall be responsible for the following—
(a) preparing project proposals and submitting them for approval to the National
Treasury;
(b) where authorisation has been granted for the project to start, the Accounting
Officer shall ensure public disclosure to intended beneficiaries within thirty days
of the allocation and disbursement of the loan;

-- 602 of 625 --

604 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) after disbursement of loans, the loan recipients accounting officer shall report
within fifteen days after the end of each quarter to the intended beneficiaries on
the expenditures and performance achieved in relation to the loan;
(d) ensuring that during the project identification and design, the intended
beneficiaries are involved through the public participatory approach to planning
through public forums to enhance leadership, ownership, social accountability and
sustainability of the project;
(e) preparing expected disbursements profiles;
(f) submitting loan disbursement claims for approval by the National Treasury;
(g) making comments on draft loan agreement from the National Treasury;
(h) participating in all consultations and negotiations of all loan agreements for
projects and programmes under their jurisdiction; and
(i) implementing, monitoring and evaluating, in close collaboration with the national
government entity responsible for National Planning, all projects and programmes
within their jurisdiction.
SINKING FUND
Establishment of Sinking Fund.
206. (1) There is hereby established a national government fund to be known as the
Sinking Fund to be administered by the Head of the Public Debt Management Office.
(2) The purposes of Sinking Fund shall be the payment of expenses of, or incidental
to, redemption of an issue of Government securities and the redemption of an issue of
Government securities.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary shall, upon approval of these Regulations, publish in the Kenya
Gazette the guidelines for the management of the Fund.
PART XV – PUBLIC FUNDS
Criteria for the establishment of a public Fund.
207. (1) The establishment of a public Fund shall at the minimum meet the following
requirements—
(a) be initiated through a proposal by the Cabinet secretary responsible for the
national government entity under which the functions of the Fund fall clearly
setting out the justifications and submit it to the Cabinet Secretary;
(b) the Cabinet Secretary shall certify in writing that the functions and the public
services to be delivered through the Fund cannot be delivered through the structure
of budget appropriations;
(c) provide a clear justification as to why a fund structure is deemed appropriate for
improved service delivery in light of the legislative and policy mandate of the
national government entity;
(d) the administration costs of the Fund shall be a maximum of three (3%) percent of
the approved budgets of the Fund;
(e) the Cabinet Secretary responsible for the national government entity functions
shall confirm in writing that the establishment of the Fund and it's continued
existence will not depend on annual financing from the national exchequer;
(f) a Fund that has a lifespan of less two years shall not be approved unless it is for
unforeseen and urgent need;

-- 603 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 605
[Subsidiary]
(g) the Cabinet Secretary shall grant approval in writing before establishment of Fund;
(h) the Cabinet Secretary responsible for the entity shall demonstrate how the
activities of the proposed Public Fund shall fit in the overall Medium Term Plan
and Budget Policy Statement; and
(i) the initial approval for establishment of a national public Fund shall be for a
maximum period of ten (10) years, beyond which Cabinet and Parliament approvals
shall be sought.
(2) Despite the provisions of paragraph (1) of this regulation, the Cabinet Secretary may
from time to time issue further guidelines on the establishment of national public Funds.
Management and winding up of a national public Fund.
208. The Cabinet Secretary shall provide for the management, operation and winding up
procedure in the guidelines for establishing each Fund which shall be in accordance with the
Act and these Regulations.
Winding up of a national government public Fund.
209. (1) Where the lifespan of Fund lapses, the process of winding up shall commence
within six (6) months from the date of the lapse.
(2) The final report after winding up the Fund shall be submitted to Parliament and the
Auditor-General for audit.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary may dissolve a public Fund where the Cabinet Secretary
responsible for a department operating a public Fund considers that a public Fund has
successfully completed the specific objective for which it was created.
PART XVI – STATE CORPORATIONS
Definitions.
210. For the purposes of this Part—
"governing body" in relation to a public entity, means a commission, a board of directors,
a board of trustees, board of governors, and council; and
"government owned enterprise" means an organisation which—
(i) is a legal person under the ownership and control of the national government;
(ii) has been assigned financial and operational powers to carry on a business activity;
and
(iii) as its main business, supplies goods or services in accordance with ordinary
commercial principles; and
(iv) is financed wholly or substantially from sources that do not require annual
appropriation by National Assembly, or imposition of a tax, levy or other charge
under legislation.
Declaration of national government entities and classification of state corporations.
211. (1) Pursuant to section 4 of the Act, the Cabinet Secretary may by notice in the
Gazette declare and classify national government entities and entities in accordance with the
Schedules as indicated in this Regulation.
(2) All State Organs including constitutional institutions and independent offices shall
be categorised as Schedule 1 national government entities.
(3) National Government owned enterprises operating on the basis of commercial
principles shall be listed as Schedule 2 national government entities.

-- 604 of 625 --

606 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(4) Regulatory agencies shall be categorised as Schedule 3 national government entities.
(5) Executive agencies, public universities and public tertiary education institutions,
national referral health institutions, boards and commissions fully or partially funded through
the national government budget shall be categorised as Schedule 4 national government
entities.
(6) National Public Funds established under the Constitution, national legislation or
subsidiary national legislation shall be classified as Schedule 5 national government entities.
(7) The Cabinet Secretary shall have powers to amend the Schedules classified under this
regulation in accordance with the provisions of the Act and this regulation.
Scope and application.
212. The provisions of the Act and these Regulations shall apply to all national
government entities declared under regulation 211 of these Regulations.
Application for listing by governing bodies of undeclared state corporations.
213. (1) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for a national government entity that should
have been declared or ought to be declared under the Act and these regulations as a national
entity but has not been declared in either of the Schedules, shall notify the Cabinet Secretary,
in writing of that the national government entity is not listed or ought to be listed in the
Schedules within 30 days after the gazettement of these Regulations.
(2) The Cabinet Secretaries of the responsible national government entities under
paragraph (1) shall submit the following information to the Cabinet Secretary in support of
its application for listing—
(a) name of the public entity;
(b) its main function or business activities;
(c) department responsible for the public entity;
(d) legal instrument under which the entity was established;
(e) dates of its establishment and financial year end;
(f) names of members of the governing body controlling the public entity;
(g) its registered address and telephone numbers;
(h) name of the chief executive officer;
(i) name of the chief financial officer;
(j) name of the company secretary, if any;
(k) authority responsible for appointing the chief executive officer and governing
body;
(l) subsidiaries, if any, under the ownership control of the entity;
(m) latest audited financial statements;
(n) amount of budgetary fiscal transfers received over the past three financial years;
and
(o) most recent strategic plan of the public entity.

-- 605 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 607
[Subsidiary]
Guiding principles for the establishment of state corporations.
214. The following principles shall apply when determining establishment and dissolution
of a Public Corporation under section 86 and 182 of the Act—
(a) there shall be a role for national government entity to fill a gap left by the market
forces through—
(i) social inclusion, where the national government entity addresses social
inequity by redistributing resources in ways that improve opportunity
and support for individuals, families and communities, allowing them
to participate in the economy and society consistent with the national
government's social inclusion agenda; or
(ii) correction of market failure, where the national government entity's
activity shall address market failures by improving social and economic
welfare through improved resource allocation, where the benefits of
national government intervention outweigh its cost;
(b) activities promoted by the corporation shall have clear and consistent objectives
and be effective in achieving their national objectives and represent value for
money for the expenditure of taxpayer funds;
(c) a government owned enterprise shall operate on commercial principles and with
a defined commercial income stream that substantially supports the associated
commercial activities;
(d) where activities involving tax expenditures demonstrate that public expenditure is
less effective in achieving the national government objective but can effectively be
undertaken on a commercial basis;
(e) there is no overlap or duplication of functions when establishing a state
corporation within the national government.
Criteria for establishing state corporations.
215. (1) In exercising the powers under section 182 of the Act, the Cabinet Secretary and
National Assembly shall be guided by regulation 214, this regulation and any other relevant
regulation of these Regulations.
(2) A state corporation may be established only with the prior approval of the Cabinet,
with reference to a legislation enacted to govern the establishment, management and
dissolution of such government commercial enterprises.
(3) In order to establish a state corporation or a subsidiary of a state corporation—
(a) the responsible Cabinet Secretary shall submit a written business case to the
Cabinet Secretary, with detailed justification for establishing the state corporation
or the subsidiary;

-- 606 of 625 --

608 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(b) the business case in paragraph subparagraph(a) shall be informed by a feasibility
assessment of the proposed state corporation or the subsidiary for the purpose of
ascertaining—
(i) the economic and financial viability of establishing the state corporation;
(ii) whether the proposed activity cannot be conducted through an existing
corporation or the parent department;
(iii) whether or not there is need to establish a new corporation;
(iv) the functions and objective that its establishment is supposed to attain;
(v) how the activities of the proposed corporation will fit in the department's
legislative mandate and medium term strategy, and aid the realization of
the objectives of the programmes associated with that department;
(vi) how it shall impact the fiscal position of the government; and
(vii) the amount of government share;
(c) the feasibility and viability assessment conducted under subparagraph (b) shall be
submitted to the Cabinet for approval.
(4) Upon approval of the business case by the Cabinet, the necessary establishment
processes shall be undertaken by the relevant department as required by a legislation
on formation, management and dissolution of state corporations to allow it perform the
functions stipulated in the instruments for incorporation.
(5) The national government entity responsible for investment portfolio management in
the National Treasury shall be constantly updated on the progress of a state corporation.
(6) The department responsible for investment portfolio management in the National
Treasury shall conduct regular review of state corporation to assess the relevance of the
mandate and the justification for their continued existence and where necessary make
recommendations to the Cabinet for the dissolution or merger of corporations.
Dissolution of State Corporations.
216. (1) A state corporation may be dissolved only with the prior approval of the
Cabinet, with reference to legislation enacted to govern the establishment, management and
dissolution of such state corporation.
(2) Subject to the provisions of a legislation enacted for the formation, management and
dissolution of state corporations, a state corporation may be dissolved—
(a) upon expiry of the lifespan of the state corporation as may be defined in the
instrument of establishment;
(b) where a state corporation has carried out the mandate for which it was created;
(c) upon reorganization of the corporation and associated government functions, and
(d) upon a merger of the corporation with another.
(3) The accounting officer related to the corporation in question shall follow-up
implementation of' the findings and eventual recommendations for dissolution to ensure
compliance.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary may by notice in the gazette prescribe guidelines for dissolution
and mergers of state corporations.
(5) Upon approval by Cabinet of the recommendations to dissolve or merge state
corporations, the Cabinet Secretary shall cause the dissolution or merge the corporation with
another.

-- 607 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 609
[Subsidiary]
(6) Upon dissolution of a state corporation, the funds corresponding to government equity
in the corporation shall be deposited into the Consolidated Fund.
(7) Upon ceasing of an entity to be a public entity, the Cabinet Secretary shall vest all the
assets and liabilities to the responsible national government entity.
(8) No national state corporation shall vest its assets in another entity without prior
approval of the Cabinet.
(9) The provisions of this regulation shall be subject to the provisions of a legislation
enacted for the formation, management and dissolution of state corporations, or the Act of
Parliament establishing that state corporation.
Evaluation of state corporation's performance.
217. (1) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for public investments, in consultation with
Cabinet Secretary shall annually agree on the performance targets with the governing body
for a national government entity listed in Schedule 2 and 3.
(2) The annual performance contract shall document the mandated key performance
measures and indicators to be attained by the national government entity as agreed between
the governing body and the responsible Cabinet Secretary, who shall give the governing board
policy direction.
(3) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for finance shall establish procedures for quarterly
reporting to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for the controlling department in order to
facilitate effective performance monitoring, evaluation and implementation of corrective
actions.
(4) Without limiting the provisions of paragraph (3) of this regulation, the National
Treasury shall design the procedures by which the Cabinet Secretary shall monitor the
implementation of strategic plans of Schedules 2 and 3 national government entities and
assess their performance and achievements.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for public investments shall issue guidelines on
performance reward and sanctions of Schedules 2 and 3 national entities.
Annual budget.
218. (1) The Cabinet Secretary responsible for the state corporation shall approve the
estimates of budget for the state corporation and shall not later than January every year,
submit to the National Treasury for approval those estimates for the following financial year.
(2) The National Treasury shall provide guidelines and the format on which the budget
shall be prepared.
(3) Budget estimates submitted under paragraph (1), shall be classified as follows—
(a) compensation of employees;
(b) use of goods and services;
(c) transfers to other levels of government; and
(d) capital.
Dividends policy and surplus funds.
219. (1) The National Treasury shall prepare and issue dividend policy guidelines on how
national government entities referred to under regulation 211(3) and (4) and remit dividends
to the National Treasury.

-- 608 of 625 --

610 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) A regulatory authority established by an Act of Parliament and referred to under
regulation 211(4) shall remit to the Collector ninety per centum of its surplus funds reported
by the management in the financial statements by the 31st October of each year.
(2A) For the purpose of this regulation, "Collector" means the Commissioner-General
appointed under section 11 of the Kenya Revenue Authority Act (Cap. 469).
(3) A regulatory authority to which this section applies shall be exempt from the income
tax.
(4) The governing body of a public entity listed in Schedule 2 referred to under regulation
211(3), shall formulate an appropriate dividend policy in line with the policy guidelines
referred under paragraph (1), and submit to the National Treasury and the respective County
Treasury.
[L.N. 141/2018, r. 2, L.N. 90/2019, r. 2.]
Quarterly reporting by governing bodies.
220. (1) Pursuant to section 83(6) of the Act, the accounting officer of a national
government entity listed in Schedules 2, 3 and 4 shall prepare and submit quarterly financial
and non-financial statements within 15 days after the end of the each quarter to the Cabinet
Secretary responsible for the national government entity with a copy to the National Treasury
and the Auditor-General.
(2) The quarterly reports prepared under paragraph (1) shall be in the format gazette by
the Cabinet Secretary and shall include information on—
(a) revenue, including funding from grants,
(b) expenditure;
(c) borrowing, including guarantees issued by the national government and any
outstanding loan arrears; and
(d) amount of profit or loss of the public entity for the quarter.
Annual financial statements.
221. (1) The accounting officer for a national government entity listed in Schedule 2
and 3 shall prepare and submit annual financial and non-financial statements in the format
gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary within three months to the Auditor General with copies to
the responsible Cabinet Secretary and the National Treasury.
(2) The annual financial and non-financial statements referred to under paragraph (1),
shall be prepared—
(a) in compliance with the International Financial Reporting Standards and as
prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting Standard Board from time to time; and
(b) the annual financial statements must be approved by the governing body.
PART XVII – INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL RELATIONS
Establishment, purpose and composition of the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic
Council.
222. (1) The Inter-governmental Budget and Economic Council members shall exercise
their mandate under the Act and these Regulations in the spirit of cooperative governance.
(2) Reviews, resolutions and recommendations of the Intergovernmental Budget and
Economic Council shall be published on the website of the National Treasury as soon as
possible after their preparation.

-- 609 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 611
[Subsidiary]
(3) The Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council shall be kept informed about
the following—
(a) stoppage of funds to a county government and any national government
intervention in county government due to serious or persistent material breaches
of service delivery imperatives;
(b) applications for national guarantees of county debts;
(c) changes in the laws and regulations governing public finance management and
sharing of revenue raised nationally;
(d) Budget calendar and budget process;
(e) the draft Budget Policy Statement prior to submission to the Cabinet;
(f) the draft Annual Debt Management Strategy Paper, prior to submission to the
Cabinet;
(g) the draft Division of Revenue Bill and the draft County Allocation of Revenue Bill,
prior to submission to the Cabinet;
(h) audit outcomes on financial and non-financial performance information; and
(i) changes to the categorization and listing of national government entities.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary may take into account any recommendation by the Council
arising from any matter under paragraph 3 of this regulation, prior to submission to the
Cabinet.
(5) All scheduled meetings of IBEC should be clearly indicated in the Budget Calendar
issued by the National Treasury.
Recovery Plan and assumption of executive responsibilities of the county.
223. (1) The Cabinet Secretary may stop the transfer of funds to a county government
immediately or in the alternative apply the provisions of section 96(3) of the Act.
(2) Where the Cabinet Secretary decides to use the alternative provided for under section
96(3)(b) of the Act, the Cabinet Secretary shall notify, in writing, the county government
and Cabinet Secretary responsible for devolved government of the need to assume executive
functions of a county that has failed to address material breaches in service delivery as per
the directive in section 96 of the Act.
(3) The issuance of a notification under section 96 of the Act shall not amount to
assumption of executive functions of the county by the national government.
(4) The notification issued under paragraph (1) shall—
(a) specify the serious material breaches and persistent material breaches which a
county government has committed;
(b) invite the county government to make written representations with regard to its
efforts to address the serious material breaches or persistent material breaches to
mitigate stoppage of funds; and
(c) give a reasonable time period for the county government to respond to the Cabinet
Secretary's request.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary shall consider representations as made by the relevant
county government and decide, with concurrence of the Joint Intergovernmental Technical
Committee, whether or not to proceed with the assumption of county functions on the basis
of an approved county recovery plan.

-- 610 of 625 --

612 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(6) For purposes of section 94 of the Act, a State organ or public entity shall be in serious
material breach if in any financial year, it operates a primary fiscal deficit that is inconsistent
with the fiscal targets set under 107 of the Act.
(7) The decision by the Cabinet Secretary to assume executive functions of the county
government in terms of section 99 of the Act shall be communicated, in writing, to the relevant
county governor, and request for the cooperation of county government in the development
of a recovery plan for approval by the Joint Committee.
(8) The decision to assume county executive functions communicated under paragraph
(7) shall—
(a) make reference to Article 225 of the Constitution and section 99 of the Act;
(b) specify the steps in the directive that the county did not comply with;
(c) announce that the national executive assumes responsibility for those county
executive obligations, where the steps in the directives were not complied with;
(d) specify the expected date, on which the assumption of responsibility takes effect;
(e) specify the extent to which and the expected period for which the national
government will assume responsibility; and
(f) provide an outline of the programme for the implementation of the assumption
of responsibility, specifying designation of persons, acting for the national
government in the assumption of the responsibility.
(9) The Cabinet Secretary shall seek approval from the Joint Committee of the recovery
plan and the release of the withheld intergovernmental fiscal transfers for the implementation
of the plan.
(10) The recovery plan approved by the Joint Committee, which shall meet the minimum
requirements in section 99(3) of the Act, shall form the basis for releasing funds withheld
during the period of stoppage.
PART XVIII – MISCELLANEOUS
Gazettement of financial accounting and reporting formats.
224. The Cabinet Secretary shall gazette the financial, accounting and reporting formats
for use by national government entities soon after these regulations become effective.
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM TO THE PUBLIC FINANCE
MANAGEMENT (NATIONAL GOVERNMENT) REGULATIONS, 2015
1. The Purpose of Public Finance Management (National Government) Regulations,
2015.
The purpose of these Regulations is to:
(i) to provide means of administering the powers vested in the Cabinet
Secretary for the National Treasury under the Constitution, the Act and any
other related legislation;
(ii) to harmonize and standardize their application throughout government
service in controlling and managing the finances;
(iii) to set out a standardized financial management system for use in
Government service which is capable of producing accurate and reliable

-- 611 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 613
[Subsidiary]
accounts free from errors, fraud and which will be useful in management
decisions and statutory reporting;
(iv) to provide for the conduct of fiscal relations between the national and
county governments; and
(v) to ensure accountability, transparency and the effective, economic and
efficient collection and utilization of public resources.
2. The Legislative Context
The process of developing a comprehensive PFM Regulations started in 2012 after
enactment of the Public Finance Management Act (Cap. 412A) which consolidated
all Public Finance Management legislations catering for both the National and
County Governments.
The development of the PFM Regulations, 2014 was guided by the following
considerations;
(i) ensuring financial autonomy of National and County Governments within a
unitary system of government and guided by provisions in the constitution
such as Article 6 and the Public Finance Management Act, 2012. As a
result, functions of PFM institutions at the national and county level were
mirrored;
(ii) ensuring the PFM Regulations encapsulates best international practices;
and
(iii) the need to separate the PFM Regulations for national and county
governments to capture the unique needs of each level of government.
These PFM Regulations, 2015 are therefore firmly anchored in Chapter 12 of the
Constitution and gives effect to the provisions of the Public Finance Management
Act (Cap. 412A).
3. Policy Background
Parliament enacted the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act (Cap. 412A) in
August, 2012 and over the past two years Kenya has been rolling out devolution
as envisaged in the Constitution. The Act on its own, however, is not sufficient
since it does not provide guidelines on all matters relating to public finance
management at the national and county level. In order to provide further clarity
on various aspects of public finance management, it is therefore necessary to have
regulations.
An efficient and effective PFM system is a necessary condition for achieving Vision
2030 and our development objectives. Investors, both foreign and local, require
assurance that a country's PFM system can be relied upon to maintain fiscal
discipline and in particular contain public debt both at the National and County
level. Without a credible public financial management system, our ability to borrow
or even attract donor funds will be curtailed. In addition, an effective PFM system
is very critical in supporting the mobilization of resources to be equitably shared
between the two levels of government.
In order to make the regulations user friendly and to capture the unique needs
of the two levels of government, two volumes of Regulations have been prepared
— one for the National Government and the other for the County Governments.
The provisions of Parts I to XVI in the two sets of Regulations are largely mirrored
but tailored to each level of government. Parts XVII onwards, however, include
provisions that are specific to each level of government.
Further, there is need to ensure prudent use of public resources in line with
Article 201 of the Constitution by providing ceilings in both the Public Finance

-- 612 of 625 --

614 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Management Act, 2012 and PFM (County) Regulations, 2014 for expenditures of
County Assemblies.
It is considered that the provisions of the proposed Public Finance Management
(National and County Governments) Regulations will provide a sufficient level of
economic, fiscal and financial detail and adequate time for the legislatures at the
National and County Governments to perform their oversight role in an effective
manner.
On the basis of the foregoing, it is considered prudent to anchor the fundamental
concepts of a modem public financial management system and its application in
Kenya in a comprehensive PFM law.
Some of the salient features of these regulations are:—
• The Regulations provide additional Fiscal responsibility principles such as—
º compensation of national and county government employees shall not exceed
35% of either level of government equitable revenue share;
º the approved expenditures of a county assembly shall not exceed seven per cent
of the total revenues of the county government or twice the personnel emoluments
of that county assembly, whichever is lower; and
º national public debt shall not exceed 50% of GDP in terms of NPV among others;
• Provides for expenditures before approval of budget estimates by national and
county assemblies under extreme circumstances.
• Provides any request for expenditures from the Contingencies Fund to have a
certificate of the relevant Cabinet Secretary confirming compliance with PFM Act
provisions.
• Provides all Government Bank Accounts for both the National and County
Governments will be held at the Central Bank of Kenya except where the cabinet
Secretary has expressly granted exemption and approved.
• Provides that the Cabinet Secretary shall provide further guidelines for loans and
advances including benefits and allowances for public officers.
• Provides for lease financing transactions by accounting officers.
• Provides for equitable transfers before approval of County Allocation of Revenue
Bill.
• Provides for various thresholds for approval of losses and write-offs including
responsibility for Accounting Officers, Cabinet Secretary, Cabinet and Parliament.
• Provides for guiding principles for national and county government borrowing;
borrowing purposes and objectives of public debt management, the criteria for
issuance of government securities both domestic and external, sets the overall debt
limit for the country at 50% of the net present value of GDP while the debt limit for
county governments is set at 20% of the audited total annual revenue and approved
by the county assembly.
• Provides for establishment of a Sinking Fund for debt redemption both levels of
government
• Provides for criteria for establishment of public funds, management and winding
up of a national public fund or a county government public fund.
• Provides the guiding principles for establishment of state corporations or county
corporations, criteria for establishment of a state or county corporations as well

-- 613 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 615
[Subsidiary]
as dissolution of state corporations; evaluation of state or county corporation
performance.
• Provides for the powers of the Cabinet Secretary to gazette financial, accounting
and reporting formats.
4. Public Consultations
The PFM Regulations have taken into account the views of key stakeholders such as
the Commission on Revenue Allocation, the Commission for the Implementation
of the Constitution, Accounting Officers, Council of Governors, County Executive
Committee Members of finance, civil society, the general public and international
and local experts on public financial management.
It is important to appreciate that one of the key recommendation from different
stakeholders was to separate the Regulations governing National and County levels
of Governments.
In order to address this recommendation, the Regulations were separated to
deal each level of Government, hence the reason why we have submitted two
volumes of Public Finance Management Regulations; PFM (National Government)
Regulations and PFM (County Government) Regulations. This will give flexibility
on the application of the Regulations to each level of Government and ensure
maximum impact of the Regulations on public finance accountability architecture.
5. Guidance
The National Treasury will sensitize stakeholders including Parliament,
accounting officers of national and county governments and the general public,
on the provisions of the public finance management (National & County
Governments) Regulations, the accountability mechanism, the monitoring and
evaluation mechanism and the need to ensure regular reporting to both the
Parliament and relevant County Assemblies.
6. Review of the Regulations
The National Treasury shall monitor the application of the PFM Regulations. This
will be done through quarterly reports sent by the relevant accounting officer
of the national or county government. In addition, the National Treasury will
also carry out regular monitoring and evaluation of the specific provisions of
these Regulations through interaction with the implementers of these Regulations,
studying various reports by Constitutional Commissions, Independent Offices,
Civil Society and the general public.
It is important to note that the Regulations shall apply to the level of government
as indicated in their headings from the commencement date of these Regulations.
In this respect, a review thereof will be done by the National Treasury with the
approval by Parliament in line with Section 205 of the Public Finance Management
Act (Cap. 412A).
7. National Treasury Contact Person
The contact person at the National Treasury is the Cabinet Secretary, Mr. Henry
Rotich or the Principal Secretary, Dr. Kamau Thugge, EBS.

-- 614 of 625 --

616 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
Regulations under section 205 (1)
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (EQUALIZATION
FUND ADMINISTRATION) REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
Regulation
1. Citation.
2. Interpretation.
3. Purpose of these Regulations.
4. Establishment of the Board.
5. Qualification requirement of members.
6. Tenure of office.
7. Vacation of office.
8. Functions of the Board.
9. Establishment of committees.
10. Expenses of the Board.
11. Meetings of the Board.
12. Minutes.
13. Disclosure of interest.
14. Establishment of county technical committee.
15. Functions of the county technical committee.
16. Establishment of sub-county technical committee.
17. Functions of the sub-county technical committee.
18. Establishment of Project Identification and Implementation Committee.
19. Functions of Project Identification and Implementation Committee.
20. Functions of the County Executive Committee Member for finance.
21. Chief Executive Officer.
22. Establishment and functions of the Secretariat.
23. Approval of workplan.
24. Utilisation of funds and preparation of workplans.
25. Criteria for identification of projects.
26. Submission of workplan to the Board.
27. Quarterly reports on projects and disbursements.
28. Report by the County Executive Committee Member for finance.
29. Submission of workplan to the Board.
30. Withdrawals from the Fund.
31. Winding up of the Fund.

-- 615 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 617
[Subsidiary]
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (EQUALIZATION
FUND ADMINISTRATION) REGULATIONS
[L.N. 54/2021]
Citation.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Public Finance Management (Equalization Fund
Administration) Regulations.
Interpretation.
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Accounting Standards Board" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
"administrator of the Fund" means the National Treasury as provided for under section
18(1) of the Act;
"Board" means the Equalization Fund Advisory Board established under regulation 4(1) of
these Regulations;
"eligible county" means a county government identified as a beneficiary of the Fund by the
Commission on Revenue in accordance with Article 216(4) of the Constitution;
"First Policy" means the First Policy determined by the Commission on Revenue Allocation
under Article 216(4) of the Constitution in identifying marginalized areas for the purposes of
Article 204(2) of the Constitution;
"Fund" means the Equalization Fund established under Article 204(1) of the Constitution;
"marginalized area" means an area identified under policy determined by the Commission
on Revenue Allocation in accordance with Article 216 (4) of the Constitution;
"revenue" has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Commission on Revenue
Allocation Act (Cap. 428); and
"Second Policy" means the Second Policy determined by the Commission on Revenue
Allocation under Article 216(4) of the Constitution in identifying marginalized areas for the
purposes of Article 204(2) of the Constitution;
"unutilized balance" means any—
(a) amounts not withdrawn from the Fund at the end of financial year;
(b) amount withdrawn from the Fund for purposes of provision of basic services under
an Appropriations Act and not expended at the end of financial year;
(c) amount earmarked for the First Policy with fourteen counties ongoing projects; or
(d) amount earmarked for the Second Policy with thirty four counties new projects to
be identified.
Purpose of these Regulations.
3. The purpose of these Regulations is to—
(a) establish an unincorporated Board to advise the Cabinet Secretary on the proper
and effective performance of the Fund;
(b) provide guidance on the administration and management of the Fund;
(c) provide for the withdrawals from the Fund;
(d) provide for completion of ongoing projects under the first policy;
(e) provide for implementation of new projects under all subsequent policies; and

-- 616 of 625 --

618 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(f) provide for the procedures in relation to winding up of the Fund.
Establishment of the Board.
4. (1) There is established an advisory board to be known as the Equalization Fund
Advisory Board which shall comprise of—
(a) the Chairperson who shall be appointed by the Cabinet Secretary;
(b) the Principal Secretary to the National Treasury or his representative designated
in writing;
(c) the Principal Secretary responsible for matters relating to devolution or his or her
representative designated in writing;
(d) one person from a pastoralist community nominated by the National Assembly;
(e) one person nominated by the Senate;
(f) one person nominated by the Council of Governors drawn from the areas defined
as marginalised;
(g) the Chief Executive Officer who shall be the secretary to the Board; and
(h) three other persons nominated from organizations working in equalization
fund beneficiary counties and special interest group, appointed by the Cabinet
Secretary.
(2) All persons nominated under sub-regulation (1), paragraphs (d), (e), (f) and (h) shall
be appointed by the Cabinet Secretary.
Qualification requirement of members.
5. A person is qualified for appointment under regulation 4(1) (a), (d), (e), (f), and (h) if
that person—
(a) is a citizen of Kenya;
(b) holds a degree from a university recognized in Kenya;
(c) has at least five years’ professional experience in a relevant field; and
(d) meets the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution.
Tenure of office.
6. Members of the Board appointed under regulation 4(1) shall, subject to the provisions
of these Regulations, hold office for a term of six years, non renewable, on such terms and
conditions as may be specified in the instrument of appointment.
Vacation of office.
7. A member of the Board, other than ex-officio member, may—
(a) at any time resign from office by notice in writing to the appointing authority;

-- 617 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 619
[Subsidiary]
(b) be removed from office by the appointing authority, if the member—
(i) has been absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board without
permission from the chairperson;
(ii) is adjudged bankrupt or enters into a composition scheme or arrangement
with his creditors;
(iii) is convicted of an offense involving dishonesty or fraud;
(iv) is convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term
exceeding six months;
(v) is incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness; or
(vi) is otherwise unable or unfit to discharge his functions.
Functions of the Board.
8. The functions of the Board with regard to the Fund shall be to—
(a) advise and make recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary on the distribution of
resources for the provision of the basic services to the marginalized areas under
Article 204 of the Constitution;
(b) appraise and evaluate projects proposed under the workplans submitted by
county technical committees to ensure compliance with the Constitution and the
recommendations issued by the Commission on Revenue Allocation;
(c) make recommendations on the priority areas requiring financing and
implementation in accordance with the workplans considered under paragraph (b);
(d) oversee, in consultation with the county governments, the implementation of the
projects to ensure compliance with the Constitution;
(e) monitor and evaluate the projects implemented by county governments using
equalization funds to determine their impact in addressing the factors contributing
to the marginalization of the areas identified in the counties;
(f) put in place measures to ensure transparency and accountability in the
implementation of equalization fund projects by county governments;
(g) establish a framework for collaboration between the national government
and county governments in the implementation of projects in line with the
Constitution;
(h) review the consolidated quarterly reports prepared by the Secretary on the
implementation of the projects and make recommendations to the Cabinet
Secretary on performance improvement;
(i) review and propose the annual estimates of expenditure of the Fund for approval
by the Cabinet Secretary; and
(j) undertake project public participation in line with Article 201 of the Constitution.
Establishment of committees.
9. The Board may establish such committees as it may consider necessary for the better
performance of its functions and the exercise of its powers under these Regulations.
Expenses of the Board.
10. (1) There shall be paid out of the Fund, expenses of the Board and such other expenses
incurred pursuant to the object and purpose for which the Fund is established.

-- 618 of 625 --

620 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(2) The expenditure incurred on the Fund shall be on the basis of and limited to annual
work programmes and budget estimates prepared by the Secretary and approved by the Board
at the beginning of the financial year to which they relate.
(3) Board expenses shall not be more than three percent of annual approved equalization
fund allocation.
Meetings of the Board.
11. (1) The Board shall meet not less than four times in every financial year and not more
than four months shall elapse between the dates of the next meeting.
(2) Unless three quarters of the total members of the Board otherwise agree, at least
fourteen days written notice of every meeting of the Board shall be given to every member
of the Board.
(3) The quorum for the conduct of the business of the Board shall be five members, of
whom the majority of shall be from amongst the non ex officio members.
(4) The Chairperson shall preside at every meeting of the Board at which he or she is
present but in his or her absence, the members present shall elect one of their number who
shall, with respect to that meeting and the business transacted, have all the powers of the
Chairperson.
(5) Unless a unanimous decision is reached a decision on any matter before the Board
shall be reached by voting.
(6) Subject to sub-regulation (3), no proceedings of the Board shall be invalid by reason
only of a vacancy among the members thereof.
(7) Subject to the provisions of this regulation, the Board may determine its own procedure
and the procedure for any committee of the Board and for the attendance of any other persons
as its meetings and may make standing orders in respect thereof.
Minutes.
12. The Board Secretary shall cause minutes of all proceedings of meetings of the Board
to be entered in books for that purpose.
Disclosure of interest.
13. (1) If a member is directly or indirectly interested in any contract, proposed contract or
other matter before the Board and is present at a meeting of the Board at which the contract,
proposed contract or other matter is the subject of consideration, he or she shall, at the
meeting and as soon as practicable after the commencement thereof, disclose the fact and
shall not take part in the consideration or discussion with respect to the contract or other
matter, or be counted in the quorum of the meeting during consideration of the matter:
Provided that if the majority of the members present are of the opinion that the experience
or expertise of the member is vital to the deliberations of the meeting, the Board may permit
the member to participate in the deliberations subject to such restrictions as it may impose.
(2) A disclosure of interest made under sub-regulation (1) shall be recorded in the minutes
of the meeting at which it is made.
Establishment of county technical committee.
14. Each County Commissioner of an eligible county shall establish and convene an all-
inclusive committee to be known as county technical committee comprising of—
(a) a chairperson who shall be the County Commissioner;
(b) a County Executive Committee Member for Finance;

-- 619 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 621
[Subsidiary]
(c) Constituency Development Fund managers;
(d) a representative of County Assembly;
(e) representatives of implementing sectors with prioritized projects; and
(f) the chairperson of the Constituency Development Fund (CDF).
Functions of the county technical committee.
15. The County Technical Committee shall be responsible for approving all projects to be
financed from the Fund.
Establishment of sub-county technical committee.
16. Each Çounty Commissioner of an eligible county shall establish a committee at the
sub-county level to be known as sub- county technical committee comprising of—
(a) a chairperson who shall be the sub-county Commissioner;
(b) a maximum of four technical officers from ministries relevant to funding priorities;
(c) the chairpersons of Project Identification and Implementation Committees within
the sub-county; and
(d) the secretary of the Constituency Development Fund (CDF).
Functions of the sub-county technical committee.
17. The functions of the sub-county technical committee shall be to—
(a) receive project funding proposals from respective Project Identification and
Implementation committees;
(b) evaluate and prioritize all development proposals from the Project Identification
and Implementation Committees;
(c) assess the feasibility and cost all project proposals received from the Project
Identification and Implementation Committees;
(d) submit project proposals and funding requests received from the Project
Identification and Implementation Committees to the county government;
(e) monitor all projects being undertaken and ensure they meet the objectives they are
originally meant to achieve;
(f) prepare quarterly reports on funds received and implementation status of all
projects financed by the Fund to the county technical committee with a copy to the
County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to finance;
and
(g) prepare and submit annual reports on implementation of all projects financed by
the Fund to the county technical committee with a copy to the County Executive
Committee Member for Finance.
Establishment of Project Identification and Implementation Committee.
18. Each County Commissioner of an eligible county shall establish a committee at the
ward level to be known as Project Identification and Implementation Committee comprising
of—
(a) a chairperson who shall be the Assistant Sub-County Commissioner;
(b) the village administrators of areas defined by the Commission on Revenue
Allocation as marginalized;

-- 620 of 625 --

622 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(c) a representative of the women, youth, minorities and persons with disabilities from
marginalized areas;
(d) a representative of the Constituency Development Fund committee member at the
sub-county level; and
(e) a representative of religious group or local Non- Governmental Organisation
(NGO) with office at ward level.
Functions of Project Identification and Implementation Committee.
19. The functions of the Project Identification and Implementation Committee shall be
to—
(a) undertake public participation, in beneficiary areas;
(b) identify and prioritize project in beneficiary areas in line with guidelines issued by
the administrator of the Fund;
(c) prepare and submit project funding proposals to sub-county technical committee;
and
(d) provide oversight on project implementation.
Functions of the County Executive Committee Member for finance.
20. The functions of the County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters
relating to finance with respect to the Fund in each eligible county shall be to—
(a) consolidate all projects approved by the county technical committee and submit to
the Secretary of the Board for funding with copy to the Commission on Revenue
allocation;
(b) prepare financial statements for the Fund for each financial year in a form
prescribed by the Accounting Standards Board in accordance with the Act and
submit to the Secretary of the Board;
(c) prepare quarterly financial statements for the fund in a form prescribed by the
Accounting Standards Board and submit to the Secretary of the Board;
(d) prepare quarterly reports on funds received and implementation status of all
projects financed by the Fund with a copy to the Secretary of the Board,
Commission on Revenue Allocation and Controller of Budget; and
(e) prepare annual report on implementation of all projects financed by the Fund with
a copy to the Secretary, Commission on Revenue Allocation, Controller of Budget
and Parliament.
Chief Executive Officer.
21. (1) There shall be the Chief Executive Officer to the Board appointed by the Cabinet
Secretary.
(2) The Chief Executive officer appointed under subparagraph (1) shall be the head of the
Secretariat established under regulation 22.
Establishment and functions of the Secretariat.
22. There shall be a Secretariat constituted by the Chief Executive Officer and whose
functions shall be to—
(a) provide technical and administrative services to the Board;
(b) implement the decisions, strategies and work plan of the Board;

-- 621 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 623
[Subsidiary]
(c) make recommendations to the Board on the formulation and implementation of
programmes for the achievement of the functions of the Board;
(d) review and consolidate the work-plans received from counties for consideration by
the Board;
(e) identify any challenges in the implementation of projects and make
recommendations to the Board on the remedial measures required to be
undertaken;
(f) maintain a data base setting out information on—
(i) projects, operations and programmes undertaken with respect to each
county which has been identified by the Commission on Revenue Allocation
as being marginalized;
(ii) monies appropriated from the Fund with respect to each project or
programme; and
(iii) status of each project or programme undertake;
(g) prepare and ensure timely submission of reports to the Board and the Cabinet
Secretary regarding the implementation of projects and programmes under the
Fund;
(h) make arrangements for periodical monitoring, evaluation and reporting of the
criteria, standards and programmes in relation to the objects and functions of the
Board; and
(i) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Board.
Approval of workplan.
23. The County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to finance
shall submit work plans through county technical committee to the Board for approval.
Utilisation of funds and preparation of workplans.
24. (1) The funds shall be utilized as conditional grants to the affected counties in
accordance with the Division of Revenue Act and the County Allocation Revenue Act for the
respective financial year.
(2) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to finance
in each of the counties identified by the Commission on Revenue Allocation shall prepare a
workplan setting out—
(a) a schedule of projects and programmes proposed to be undertaken by the county
government in the areas identified by Commission on Revenue Allocation;
(b) a technical assessment of the viability of the schedule of projects and programmes;
(c) public participation undertaken during the process of identification of programmes
and projects;
(d) an assessment of the manner in which the programmes or projects would be
expected to address the shortcomings identified by the Commission on Revenue
Allocation in the provision of the identified basic needs;
(e) an assessment of how the programmes and projects identified impact on the
County Integrated Development Plan; and
(f) the approximate cost of the works to be undertaken in relation to a project or
programme identified in the workplan.

-- 622 of 625 --

624 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) In identifying programmes and projects for inclusion in the workplan, the County
Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to finance shall—
(a) take into account—
(i) the criteria recommended by Commission on Revenue Allocation;
(ii) the costing of the project and the time required for the implementation of
the project on a priority basis;
(iii) recommendations by the Commission on Revenue Allocation;
(iv) recommendations, standards and guidelines issued by the Board;
(v) the interventions required to be undertaken on a priority basis in order to
address the needs identified by the Commission on Revenue Allocation for
the provision of identified basic services; and
(vi) the recommendations of the respective Ministry or State Department at the
counties; and
(b) collaborate with the Board and the relevant Ministry or State Department.
(4) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to finance
shall ensure that a work plan prepared under sub-regulation (1) of this regulation is aligned
to the annual development plan of the county prepared under the Act.
(5) The Board, relevant Ministry or State Department shall make its recommendations
to the County Executive Committee Member for matters relating to finance on the proposed
workplan within fourteen days of the receipt of a request under sub-regulation (3) (b) of this
regulation.
Criteria for identification of projects.
25. In determining and identifying projects or programmes for the provision of basic
services and financing under the Fund, the County Executive Committee Member responsible
for matters relating to finance shall take into account the input of the Board and the
committees established under these Regulations.
Submission of workplan to the Board.
26. (1) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to
finance shall, upon approval of a workplan, submit the workplan to the Board.
(2) Upon receipt of the workplan, the Board shall—
(a) appraise the workplan to ensure compliance with these Regulations and that
it adequately addresses the needs identified by the Commission on Revenue
Allocation;
(b) identify the programmes or projects that require to be implemented on a priority
basis, and make its recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary.
Quarterly reports on projects and disbursements.
27. The Board shall, on a quarterly basis, submit a report to the Cabinet Secretary with a
copy to the Commission on Revenue Allocation and Controller of Budget, detailing—
(a) a summary of the project and programmes approved for financing in the preceding
year indicating the funding status of such projects, if any;
(b) a summary of the status of disbursements of funds to the various projects and
implementation progress;

-- 623 of 625 --

[Rev. 2022] Public Finance Management CAP. 412A 625
[Subsidiary]
(c) a summary of the status of disbursements from the Fund to the respective county
governments or any agency involved in implementation of any projects financed
from the Fund; and
(d) any restriction imposed on a county government or any agency involved in the
implementation of the projects or programmes of the national government.
Report by the County Executive Committee Member for finance.
28. (1) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to
finance—
(a) shall prepare and submit to the Board quarterly reports on the implementation of
the projects or programs under the workplan in the format prescribed by the Board;
and with a copy to the Commission on Revenue allocation;
(b) shall ensure that any projects undertaken under the workplan are carried out in
accordance with the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act (Cap. 412C), and
any other law.
(2) A report prepared under sub-regulation (1) shall be submitted to the Secretary of the
Board and shall include—
(a) information relating to the procurement of services and works in relation to the
projects and programmes under the workplan;
(b) a schedule of the works required to be undertaken and status of the implementation
of projects and programmes;
(c) the timelines for completion of specific phases of projects and programmes;
(d) the manner in which the funds received from the Fund have been utilized in
relation to any project or programme;
(e) the monies disbursed and any balance of unspent funds; and such other
information as the Board may require.
(3) The Secretary to the Board shall consolidate the reports submitted for consideration
by the Board.
Submission of workplan to the Board.
29. (1) The County Executive Committee Member responsible for matters relating to
finance shall, upon approval of a workplan, submit the workplan to the Board.
(2) Upon receipt of the workplan, the Board—
(a) shall appraise the workplan to ensure compliance with these Regulations and
that it adequately addresses the needs identified by the Commission on Revenue
Allocation;
(b) shall identify the programmes or projects that require to be implemented on a
priority basis, and make its recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary.
Withdrawals from the Fund.
30. (1) The administrator of the Fund shall open a designated Equalisation Fund account
at Central Bank of Kenya.
(2) Where a withdrawal from the Fund is authorized under an Act of Parliament that
approves the appropriation of money, the Secretary of the Board through the National
Treasury shall make a requisition for the withdrawal and submit it to the Controller of Budget
for authorization.

-- 624 of 625 --

626 CAP. 412A Public Finance Management [Rev. 2022]
[Subsidiary]
(3) The authorization by the Controller of Budget of a withdrawal from the Fund, together
with written instructions from the National Treasury requesting for withdrawal, shall be
sufficient authority for the Central Bank of Kenya to pay amounts from the Equalization Fund
account in accordance with the authorization and instructions given.
(4) All withdrawals made from the Fund under sub-regulation (1) shall be deposited into
the respective spending counties account.
(5) Any unutilised balances in the Equalisation Fund shall not lapse at the end of the
Financial year, but shall be retained for use for the purposes for which the Equalisation Fund
was established.
Winding up of the Fund.
31. (1) At least eighteen months before the expiry of the term specified under Article
204(6) of the Constitution or in legislation enacted by Parliament pursuant to Article 204(7)
of the Constitution—
(a) the Board shall prepare a status report on all existing pending projects and their
funding requirements in line with the submitted work plans; and
(b) the Cabinet Secretary shall—
(i) make the necessary requisition for the transfer of monies to the county
governments for the completion of the projects; and
(ii) ensure that monies required for the completion of the projects has been
transferred to the respective county governments.
(2) At least twelve months before the expiry of the period specified under Article 204(6)
of the Constitution or in legislation enacted by Parliament pursuant to Article 204(7) of the
Constitution the county executive committee members in charge of finance in the respective
county governments shall submit to the Board, with copy to the Commission on Revenue
allocation—
(a) a schedule of the programmes and projects implemented pursuant to Article 204
of the Constitution and the expected completion date;
(b) an assessment report of the impact of the programmes and projects that have been
implemented pursuant to Article 204 of the Constitution;
(c) a financial report on the projects and programmes; and
(d) a terminal monitoring and evaluation report.
(3) The Board shall prepare the final winding up report of the Fund not later than three
months from the period specified under Article 204(6) of the Constitution or in legislation
enacted by Parliament pursuant to Article 204(7) of the Constitution for approval by the
Cabinet Secretary.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall, submit the final report to the National Assembly and the
Senate, with copy to the Commission on Revenue Allocation and Controller of Budget, within
fourteen days of the receipt of the initial report under subregulation (3).

-- 625 of 625 --